)NIAN_ INSTITUTION  NOIinillSNI_NVINOSHilWS  S3  I y VU  8 11 


mws  S3i y va a n libraries  Smithsonian  institution 


2! 

O 


F 


f— * 
3 
K— 


H* 

(/y 

z: 


2: 

o 


i— 

3 


m 


)NIAN  INSTITUTION  NIOlinjLIJLSNI  NVIN0SH1MS  S3  I H Vd  9 11 


(/> 


UllNS  S3ldVd9ll  LIBRARIES  SMITHSONIAN  INSTITUTION 


)NIAN  INSTITUTION  NOilfllllSNi  NVIN0SH1IWS  S3ldVd9!l 


z 

o 


H* 

3 

H— 


17) 

z 


•HUNS  S3  lava  an.  libraries  smithsonian  institution 


>N  I AN  INSTITUTION  NOlirUllSNi  NVINOSHilWS  S3  I M v a a n 


V) 


c 

•H 


o 

z 


iiiiais _S3 i ava  a n libraries  smithsonian  institution 


dumb. 


CD 


RARIES  SMITHSONIAN  INSTITUTION  NOJlfUllSNI  NVINOSH1 


millSNI  NVINOSHlflNS  S 3 I H V H 8 IT  LIBRARIES  • SMITHSOIN 


z 

o 


3 

b~ 


(■MMr 

c n 
Z 


RARIES  SMITHSONIAN  INSTITUTION  NOIlfllliSNI  NVINOSH1 


co 


X 

CO 

o 

21 


> 

-2L 


ifllllSN!  NVINOSHilTMS  S3  1BVH8I1  L 1 B R A R I E3-  SMITHSOIS 


z 

co 


cz 

H 


O 

z 


RAR  I ES  SMITHSONIAN  INSTITUTION  NOiiniliSNI  NVINOSHi 


iiniusNi  NViNOSHims  s 3 1 u v y 8 n libraries  smithso? 


1RARIES  SMITHSONIAN  INSTITUTION  NOlinilJLSNI  NVINOSH. 


liniliSNI  NVINOSHilWS  S3IBVB8I1  LIBRARIES  SMITHSOi 

r~  Z r~  Z 

— r~\  «—  /-«. 


? 


V s 


A 

I 


BOATS  .ATTACKING  WHALES 


THE 


zx  mi 


•>  jl]  : jr" 

7fif 

ktl- 


A 


NATURAL  HISTORY 


OF 


■ -4  ■ ■■  f . A 


THE  SPERM  WHALE 


ITS  ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY FOOD 

SPERMACETI— AMBERGRIS RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  FISHERY- 

CHASE  AND  CAPTURE “ CUTTING  IN  ” AND  “TRYING  OUT  

DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  SHIPS,  BOATS,  .MEN,  AND 
INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  THE  ATTACK  ; 

WITH  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  ITS  FAVOURITE  PLACES  OF  RESORT. 


TO  WHICH  IS  ADDED,  A SKETCH 


OF  A 

SOUTH-SEA  WHALING  VOYAGE; 


EMBRACING  A DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  EXTENT,  AS  WELL 
AS  THE  ADVENTURES  AND  ACCIDENTS  THAT  OCCURRED  DURING  I ; 
VOYAGE  IN  WHICH  THE  AUTHOR  WAS  PERSONALLY  LMGAG 


Bir  THOMAS  BEALE,  Surgeon, 

DEMONSTRATOR  OF  ANATOM^F'^O  TH E ECLECTIC  SOCIETY  € -■' 
LONDON,  ETC.,  AND  LATE  SURGEON  TO 
THE  “ KENT  ” ANQ  “ SARAH  AND  ELIZABETH/'  SOUTH  SEIM../: 


LONDON : 

JOHN  VAN  VOORST,  1,  PATERNOSTER  ROW 


M.DCCC.XXXi'X 


LONDON : 

FEINTED  BY  MANNING  AND  MASON, 
I VY-LANEj  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 


TO 


THOMAS  STURGE,  ESQ. 

OF 

NEWINGTON-BUTTS. 


SlR, 

I feel  prompted  both  by  duty  and  inclination  to  dedicate 
to  you  this  work  on  the  Natural  and  Commercial  History  of  the 
Sperm  Whale*  Having  acquired  most  of  the  information  con- 
tained in  this  Volume  during  my  engagement  in  your  ships, 
I could  not  allow  the  present  opportunity  to  escape  without 
expressing  the  satisfaction  I have  felt  at  witnessing  your  kind- 
ness towards  the  seamen  and  others  engaged  in  your  service 
in  the  South-Sea  Fishery* 

Your  care  for  their  comfort  and  welfare  has  been  constantly 
shewn  in  the  attention  you  have  paid  to  the  proper  fitting  out 
of  your  ships,  so  as  to  render  the  voyage — which  is  necessarily 
long — less  irksome  and  comfortless  to  those  brave  men  who 
go  out  to  capture  the  “ giant  of  the  deep;”  while  the  excellent 
advice  and  more  solid  assistance  which  you  have  rendered  to 
their  wives  and  families,  when  their  natural  protectors  have 
been  “far  o’er  the  sea,”  have  formed  a striking  contrast  to  the 
conduct  of  some  other  ship-owners,  possessed  of  the  same 
means,  but  with  less  disposition  to  solace  those  who  are  so 
often  left  friendless  and  unfortunate. 

But  irrespectively  of  these  considerations,  your  character 
may  be  estimated  by  the  incessant  efforts  you  have  made  to 


VI 


DEDICATION* 


liberate  the  Negro  from  the  condition  of  the  slave, —efforts 
which  were  commenced  many  years  since,  and  at  a time  too, 
when  to  attempt  to  break  his  chains  was  considered  the  index 
of  a weak  or  flighty  intellect.  As  the  trusty  friend  of 
Macaulay,  you  fought  the  battle  of  the  Negro,  while  others 
were  standing  aloof  watching  the  issue  of  the  conflict,  and  if 
was  not  until  the  enemies  of  the  dark  human  race  began  their 
precipitate  retreat,  that  the  wavering  friends  of  the  cause 
flocked  around  the  banner  you  had  helped  to  raise  to  share 
the  honours  of  your  victory.  And  now  that  the  Negro  is 
free,  and  you  behold  the  hallowed  consummation  of  your  just, 
yet  tedious  and  incessant  exertions,  I have  no  doubt  (though 
to  such  conduct  a public  tribute  is  due),  that  your  greatest 
reward  is  in  your  own  feelings,  independently  of  worldly 
praise. 

That  you  may  live  long,  to  enjoy  the  happiness  surely 
emanating  from  such  generous  acts,  is  the  wish  of  your 

Very  humble  Servant, 


THOMAS  BEALE, 


The  first  edition  of  this  work  having  been  attended 
with  a success  which  far  exceeded  my  expectation,  1 
have  been  induced  to  commit  this  second  edition  to 
the  press,  with  a view  of  rendering  the  book  more 
perfect,  and  more  worthy  of  public  attention,  by  the 
addition  of  various  new  subjects ; the  principal  of 
which  forms  the  second  part  of  the  present  volume, 
I have  spared  neither  time,  trouble,  nor  expense,  in 
endeavouring  to  render  it  worthy  the  patronage  of 
my  friends ; and  although  I have  not  the  slightest 
pretension  to  literary  tact,  1 do  hope  that  my  present 
attempt  may  be  found  somewhat  interesting,  and  even 
useful,  until  some  person  better  qualified  for  the  task 
shall  arise,  and  fill,  with  a more  solid  production,  the 
u chasm”  which  has  existed  so  long  in  this  depart- 
ment of  Natural  and  Commercial  History, 

If  this  new  effort  should  be  attended,  as  my  first  un- 
expectedly was,  with  the  approbation  of  such  natural- 
ists as  Owen,  Cuvier,  and  Bell,  I shall  indeed  feel 
myself  amply  repaid  for  these  labours,  which  have 
been  pursued  in  hours  that  I have  wrested  from  other 
and  more  toilsome  avocations. 

Thomas  Beale, 

Bedford  Square  East , 

October , 1838. 


CONTENTS 


PART  I. 


Introductory  Remarks  . 

CHAPTER  I. 

External  form  and  peculiarities  of  the  Sperm  Whale 

XL 

Habits  of  the  Sperm  Whale- 


Swimming 

Breathing 


•Feeding 

m. 


IV. 


v. 


Other  actions  of  the  Sperm  Whale 

VI. 

Herding,  and  other  particulars  of  the  Sperm  Whale 

VII. 

Nature  of  the  Sperm  Whale’s  food 

VIII. 

Anatomy  and  Physiology  of  the  Sperm  Whale; 

Of  the  Skeleton 
Of  the  Cranium  . 

Of  the  Lower  Jaw 
Of  the  Spinal  Column  and  the  Cervical  Vertebrae 
Of  the  Dorsal  and  Terminal  Vertebrae 
Of  the  Spinal  Canal 
Of  the  Pelvis  and  Ribs  . 

Of  the  Sternum  and  the  Scapula 
Of  the  Bones  which  form  the  Fins 
Of  the  Muscles 

Of  the  construction  of  the  Tail 
Of  the  Skin  . 

Of  the  Teeth 

Of  the  (Esophagus,  Stomach,  and  Intestines 
Of  the  Liver,  Pancreas,  and  Spleen 
Of  the  Kidneys,  Bladder,  and  Renal  Capsules 
Of  the  Blood,  the  Heart,  and  Arteries  . 

Of  the  Larynx  and  the  Lungs 
Of  the  Blow-hole,  or  Passage  for  the  Air 
Of  the  Brain 
Of  the  sense  of  Touch 
Of  the  Ear  . 

Of  the  Eye  . 

Of  the  Sexual  Organs 
Of  the  Whales  examined  by  Hunter 


PAGE 

. 1—22 


. 23 


. 33 


. 39 


. 41 


. 46 


. 51 


. 55 


. 70 
. 72 
. 78 
. 79 
. 80 
. 81 
. 82 
. 84 
. 86 
. 87 
. 88 
. 89 
. 90 
. 92 
. 96 
. 102 
. 103 
. 104 
. 107 
. 109 
. 110 
. 114 
. 114 
. 115 
. 122 
. 126 


CONTENTS. 


IX. 

Of  Spermaceti,  etc.  ....... 

X. 

Of  Ambergris  ........ 

XI. 

Rise  and  progress  of  the  Sperm  Wiiale  Fishery  . 

XII. 

Description  of  the  Boats,  with  the  various  Instruments 
employed  in  the  capture  of  the  Sperm  Whale 

XIII. 

Chase  and  capture  of  the  Sperm  Whale 

XIV. 

Of  the  “ cutting  in  ” and  “ trying  out  ” 

XV. 

Of  the  favourite  places  of  resort  of  the  Sperm  Whale  . 


PART  II. 

SKETCH  OF  A SOUTH-SEA  WHALING  VOYAGE. 

Introductory  Remarks  . . . ...  . 19*3 

CHAPTER  1. 

Departure  from  England — arrive  off  Cape  Horn — the  Terra  del 
Fuegians — Ildefonsa  Isles — Patagonians— Byron’s  Account— 
Coquimbo — Shock  of  an  Earthquake  described — luminous 
appearance  of  the  Sea — British  hospitality — Feast  of  the  Cheya 
—the  Author  is  robbed — -leaves  Coquimbo — Scenery  around 
- — Hair- Seal  hunt — Sea-Lion  fight— tame  Pelican  . 198- — 220 

II. 

Continue  our  course  along  the  shore  of  Peru — its  conquest  by  Pi- 
zarro— cruel  measures  of  the  Spaniards — Retribution  221 — 225 

III. 

Arrive  at  Paita—  Remarks — Monte  Christa — beautiful  Birds  and 
Insects — Swallow-like  nests  of  Wasps — Attack  upon  our  Wood- 
choppers — Road  from  the  Port  to  the  Town — beautiful  Trees 
and  Birds — Music  of  the  Birds — Fire-flies  — arrive  at  the 
Town  — beset  by  the  Inhabitants — shocking  Diseases — the 
Mother  of  a fine  Family — an  old  Woman’s  Son  . 226—282 

IV. 

Leave  Monte  Christa— Remarks— kill  Whales — Owhyhee  seen  by 
our  black  Cook  —pleasant  Reflections  , « 2*33—285 


9 

PAGE 

. 127 
. 130 
. 136 

. 154 
. J 58 

. 185 
. 188 


10 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  V. 

Arrive  at  Owhyhee— wild  appearance  of  the  Natives — we  land — 
their  conduct  to  us — we  trade  with  the  Natives — alluring  crea- 
tures offered  for  sale — the  Natives  carry  our  Boat  to  the  sea — 
their  yelling,  etc.— we  procure  Goats,  etc. — a Volcano- — Re- 
marks on  the  Scenery — Sunday  at  Owhyhee — our  reception  in 
the  Bay  of  Karakakoa — conduct  of  the  Missionaries — Religious 
tyranny— Reflections— -instances  of  religious  tyranny— -Mr. 
Platt — Raina — Tahoorawa— Mowee — arrive  at  Oahoo — large 
Flying-fish — Water-spout — Dr.  Rooke — Kinau  and  Tuanoa, 
a Tale  of  the  Sandwich  Islands  — the  White  Residents  at 
Oahoo — Water  of  the  Desert — sup  with  the  Queen  Regent — 
Description — Captain  Hinckley— Madame  Poki” — “ Old 
Thunder  ” — “ Tameehama,”  his  amusements— Writing  of  the 
Chiefs— Native  Letter  and  Translation — the  Major’s  Table 
d’Hote — the  Pele  of  Nuanu — Feats  of  the  Natives... 286 — 266 

VI. 

Departure  for  the  Whale  Fishery — an  Apprentice  drowned — 
arrive  at  the  Bonins — experience  an  Indian  Typhoon — its 
Description— Marine  Cave,  its  beauties  enumerated — Sharks 
— Remarks— Boat  Adventure  off  the  Bonin  Islands,  267 — -291 

VI  t. 

Departure  for  New  Guinea — the  Caroline  Islands — Remarks  on 
the  Natives — the  Massacre  of  the  Crew  of  the  “Falcon” — 
leave  them  in  a “ Squall” — fall  in  with  an  unknown  Reef — 
narrow  Escape — Fead’s  Group— Oraison  Islands— St.  George’s 
Channel — Excursions  up  the  Channel  in  our  Boats  to  find  the 
Natives — narrow  Escape  from  Surf— Storm  ensues — we  are 
exposed  to  it  in  the  Boats — intense  heat  of  the  Sun — New 
Britain — account  of  the  Natives — Remarks  on  their  condition 
—see  no  Whales— shape  our  course  for  New  Holland — 
i(  Lucansay’s  ” and  Lousiade  Islands — Scenery — Noddies — 
intense  Heat — -fall  in  with  two  Natives- — their  Fear — tall 
Cocoa-nut  Trees— Mode  of  climbing  them — Accident  to  one 
of  our  Men — we  are  surprised  by  the  Natives — Bougainville 
— Natives— we  barter  with  them— their  Bows  and  Arrows — 
Remarks  on  the  Natives — they  sometimes  attack  Whalers — 
miraculous  Escape  of  our  Ship— she  passes  over  a Reef — 
leave  Bougainville— we  kill  a female  Whale  . . 292 — 318 

VIII. 

Make  sail  for  the  Ladrone  Islands — arrive  at  “ Saint  John’s 
Island”— send  boats  on  Shore— Trade  with  the  Natives — their 
Description — Reflections  on  their  ideas  of  Beauty — Compari- 
sons— a Dandy  Savage- — their  Women — one  of  their  Young 
Women  approach  us — description  of  her  Conduct — a Necro- 
mancer— his  Invocation  to  the  Storm — we  crowd  all  sail  for 
the  u Ladrones”—  Reflections  on  Saint  John’s  Islanders — 
Scenery— Happiness— cross  the  Line  fourth  time  . 319 — 332 


CONTENTS. 


11 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Arrive  at  the  Ladrone  Islands — their  Discovery-— conduct  of  the 
Spaniards — Enjoyment  of  the  Crew — the  Ladrones — their 
Sanguinary  Character — a Victim— Punishment — Murder  of 
Captain  Stavers — Passions  of  the  Ladrones— Oranges,  etc. — - 
Toddy-cutters — mode  of  procuring  Toddy — Mosquitoes  and 
English  Sailors — Cock-fighting — its  Description — a Ladrone 
Gamester — dreadful  Accident  to  our  Second  Mate— Tyranny 
of  our  Captain— he  is  wounded — six  Men  flogged— its  bad 
effects  upon  their  minds — Remarks— leave  the  Ladrones— 
the  Islands  enumerated  .....  ‘333— *347 

X. 

We  are  overtaken  by  a Hurricane  near  the  Sulphur  Islands — lose 
all  our  Sails  — make  the  Bonins — go  on  Shore — plant  Cocoa-nuts 
and  Bananas— fall  in  with  numbers  of  fine  Turtle — their  capture 
described — Sharks,  Dog-fish,  and  Devil-fish — they  wait  to  de- 
vour the  young  Turtle— our  good  living  and  its  effects — North 
Island — Capt.  Younger — a Pig- Hunt — causes  of  my  leaving  the 
“ Kent” — Remarks  on  the  effects  of  tyranny  on  Seamen — Kind- 
ness of  Captain  Swain— Mr.  Hildyard — I leave  the  “ Kent” 
at  midnight — Reflections  on  leaving  her — the  brave  Seamen 
who  were  left  on  board — fate  of  the  “Kent”  . . 348 — 356 

XL 

Happiness  of  the  Crew  on  board  the  “ Sarah  and  Elizabeth” — - 
proper  conduct  of  the  Captain — great  success  attends  us — the 
ship  is  filled — excitement  of  the  Crew — the  last  Whale- 
steer  towards  the  Sandwich  Islands — see  immense  numbers  of 
large  Whales— reflections  on  our  enormous  distance  from 
home — near  Kamschatka— - pass  the  meridian  of  Longitude- 
Medusae — Ianthina  Fragilis— make  the  Island  of  Morotoi — 
Mowee,  its  Church  and  Fort — Religious  intolerance — proceed 
to  Oahoo — Diamond-Point— Dr.  Rooke — D.  Finlayson,  Esq. 
— Mr.  Douglas — his  unfortunate  death  . . 357- — 363 

XII. 

Leave  the  Sandwich  Islands — arrive  at  the  Society  Islands — 
Enter  the  harbour  of  “Riatea” — trade  for  Shells — fondness 
of  the  Natives  for  Rum — the  Queen  longs  for  some— her 
dissimulation  — Picturesque  Views  in  passing  through  the 
harbour  of  “ Riatea” — “ Bolabola” — its  appearance  from  the 
Sea — enter  its  Harbdur— visit  the  King’s  House — gigantic 
and  intoxicated  Natives — fears  of  the  Captain — encounter  an 
enormous  and  drunken  Chief — our  conversation  on  the  effects 
of  Drunkenness — I am  surrounded  with  “ grim”-looking 
Beings — departure  of  a Chief— conversation  with  the  King — 
sleep  in  the  King’s  house — bad  conduct  of  the  Natives — my 
Disappointment — Diseases  of  the  Natives — Wounds  from 
Musquet-balls — my  astonishment  at  finding  them  at  War- 
terrible  Diseases — I attend  the  Sick — my  Appearance— a 


12 


CONTENTS. 


little  boy’s  affection  for  his  sick  Mother— a young  man  is  bled 
— Mr.  Platt,  the  moral  Missionary — conduct  of  Missionaries 
—their  tyranny,  and  its  action  upon  the  Natives — their  con- 
duct at  the  Sandwich  Islands,  and  its  effects — their  meanness — ■ 
Reflection — Mr.  Williams— Mr.  Smith— Thieving  and  Prosti- 
tution among  the  Natives — they  form  the  plan  of  seizing  our 
Ship— a new  principle  of  action  wanted  among  the  Missiona- 
ries—their  entire  failure  at  Bolabola  after  forty  years  trouble 
and  expense— The  old  King  of  Bolabola  and  the  Native  Pilot 
—the  Father  of  two  pretty  Girls  and  the  Bible — the  Women  of 
Bolabola— their  Tattooing — their  Hair— their  Stature- — a Bola- 
bola Girl’s  Eyes — we  are  invaded  by  thirty  Women— leave  the 
Society  Islands — our  Passage  towards  Cape  Horn — prodigious 
Seas  — a Sailor  aloft  at  Night  — three  Men  washed  from 
the  Jib-boom — their  Deaths— a Sailor’s  feelings — make  Cape 
Horn — touch  at  Pernambuca— cross  the  Line  the  sixth  time 
— encounter  bad  Weather  in  the  Channel  — - make  Beachy 
Head — Reflections  on  seeing  our  Native  Land— stern  Disease 
has  been  raging  during  our  absence  — we  approach  Home 
with  faltering  steps— the  old  House— my  emotion  and  fate 


364-393 


DIRECTIONS  FOR  PLATES. 


Boats  attacking  Whales 


frontispiece  • 


Kinau  descending  the  Pele  of  Nuanu 

Bonin  Island— Boat  passing  through  the  Breakers 


THE  NATURAL  HISTORY 


OF 

THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


PART  L 


INTRODUCTORY  REMARKS. 

It  is  the  principal  object  of  this  work  to  describe, 
probably,  the  largest  inhabitant  of  the  globe,  known 
commonly  under  the  name  of  the  spermaceti  whale,— 
by  the  French,  as  the  cachalot^— and  by  systematic 
naturalists,  as  the  Physeter  macrocephalus,  and  which 
as  yet  has  not  assumed  the  station  to  which  it  is 
entitled  in  the  history  of  animated  nature. 

Since  the  earliest  days  of  natural  history  down  to  the 
present  time,  the  sperm  whale  has  been  subjected  to 
constant  misrepresentation,  referable  to  the  contracted 
information  of  those  who  have  undertaken  its  descrip- 
tion, and  who  have  consequently  been  obliged  to  com- 
pile their  accounts  from  sources  inaccurate  and  false,  on 
which  they  ought  not  to  have  depended,  and  they 
should  rather  have  left  a blank  in  the  page,  than  to 
have  filled  it  with  the  results,  as  Cuvier  has  observed, 

B 


2 


INTRODUCTORY 


u of  that  heated  imagination  which  leads  some  en- 
thusiasts  to  see  nothing  in  nature,  hut  miracles  and 
monsters. 

In  fact,  till  the  appearance  of  Mr.  Huggins5  admir- 
able print,  few,  with  the  exception  of  those  immediately 
engaged  in  the  fishery,  had  the  most  distant  idea 
even  of  the  external  form  of  this  animal ; and  of  its 
manners  and  habits,  people  in  general  seem  to  know  as 
little  as  if  its  capture  had  never  given  employment  to 
British  capital,  or  encouragement  to  the  daring  courage 
of  our  hardy  seamen.  While  the  very  term,  whale- 
fishery,  seems  associated  with  the  coast  of  Greenland 
or  icebound  Spitz bergen,  and  the  stern  magnificence  of 
arctic  scenery,  few  connect  the  pursuit  of  this  s<  sea 
beast  ” with  the  smiling  latitudes  of  the  South  Pacific, 
and  the  coral  islands  of  the  torrid  zone  ; and  fewer  still 
have  more  distinct  conception  of  the  object  of  this 
pursuit,  than  that  it  is  a whale,  producing  the  substance 
called  spermaceti,  and  the  animal  oil  best  adapted  to  the 
purpose  of  illumination. 

The  Greenland  whale,  or  Balcena  mysticetus , has  so 
frequently  been  described  in  a popular  manner,  that  the 
public  voice  has  long  enthroned  him  as  monarch  of  the 
deep,  and  perhaps  the  dread  of  disturbing  such  weighty 
matters  as  a settled  sovereignty  and  public  opinion,  may 
have  deterred  those  best  acquainted  with  the  merits  of 
the  case  from  supporting  the  more  legitimate  claims  of 
his  southern  rival  to  this  pre-eminence. 

Since  the  year  1775,  in  which  we  date  the  origin  of 
the  sperm-whale  fishery  from  this  country,  although 


REMARKS. 


3 


many  thousands  of  persons  have  been  from  time  to  time 
engaged  in  the  pursuit,  and  must  have  possessed  the 
best  opportunities  of  observing  the  habits  and  manners 
of  this  immense  animal,  yet  not  one  has  stepped  forward 
to  vindicate  its  history  from  the  absurd  and  fabulous 
accounts  with  which  it  has  been  loaded,  and  of  which 
many  instances  will  be  found  in  the  following  pages. 

For  notwithstanding  that  the  sperm  whale  is  one  of 
the  most  noiseless  of  marine  animals,  yet  the  Abbe 
Lecoz,  in  his  account  of  it,  gives  it  the  power  of  emit- 
ting terrible  groans  when  in  distress,  and  which  he 
states  are  so  loud  and  deep,  that  it  is  possible  to  hear 
them  from  a great  distance ; and  Anderson  asserts,  that 
a cachalot,  which  was  frightened  at  the  approach  of  his 
ship,  uttered  a cry  so  loud  and  violent,  like  the  sound 
of  a bell,  that  it  caused  even  the  vessel  to  shake ; and 
yet  all  those  which  have  been  destroyed  by  the  harpoon 
and  lance,  and  which  have  been  terribly  frightened,  and 
have  made  the  most  violent  efforts  to  escape,  never  were 
heard  to  emit  the  slightest  sound,  and  it  is  well  known 
among  the  most  experienced  whalers,  that  they  never 
produce  any  nasal  or  vocal  sounds  whatever,  except  a 
trifling  hissing  at  the  time  of  the  expiration  of  the  spout. 
But  even  the  Baron  Cuvier  follows  the  account  of 
these  old  historians,  and  asserts,  that  “ in  the  combat, 
fear,  fury,  or  pain  draw  from  them  such  profound  groans, 
or  piercing  cries,  that  their  congeners  are  attracted  in 
crowds  from  all  sides,  continue  the  fight  with  fresh 
ardour  and  audacity,  and  stain  the  water  with  blood  to 
the  distance  of  many  leagues.” 


4 


INTRODUCTORY 


From  these  accounts  it  is  evident,  that  both  Ander- 
son and  the  Abbe  Lecoz,  have  been  mistaken  in  the  kind 
of  whale  which  they  saw,  and  which  they  heard  emit 
the  sounds  of  which  they  have  written*  Having  no 
doubt  mistook  the  sperm  whale  for  the  balaena  mysti- 
cetus,  or  common  Greenland  whale,  which  I have  heard 
myself  produce  loud  sounds,  but  which  have  more  resem- 
bled  the  roaring  of  an  enraged  bull,  than  the  vehement 
sound  of  a bell,  as  Anderson  has  asserted* 

While  the  sperm  whale  has  been  quietly  searching 
the  ocean  depths  for  his  food,  and  avoiding  with  the 
greatest  care  and  timidity  the  slightest  danger  or  ren- 
contre of  any  kind,  he  has  been  represented  by  Olassen 
and  Povelsen  as  the  most  savage  and  ferocious  of  all 
marine  animals;  for  not  only,  according  to  their  ac- 
counts, does  the  cachalot  constantly  thirst  for  the  blood 
of  every  fish  in  the  sea,  but  actually  possesses  a relish  for 
human  flesh,  which  we  are  led  to  suppose  they  wished 
to  satiate,  when  these  historians  assert  that  they  seized, 
and  upset  with  their  jaws,  a boat  which  contained  some 
seamen,  whom  they  speedily  devoured. 

If  these  huge  but  timid  animals  happen  to  see  or 
hear  the  approach  of  a ship  or  boat,  their  fear  in  all 
cases  is  excessive,  and  they  either  dive  into  the  depths 
of  the  ocean,  or  skim  along  its  surface  with  the  utmost 
precipitation,  to  avoid  the  danger  of  a concussion,  or  the 
blow  of  the  harpoon,  which,  when  inflicted,  often  para- 
lyses the  largest  and  strongest  of  them  with  affright,  in 
which  state  they  will  often  remain  for  a short  period  on 
the  surface  of  the  sea,  lying  as  it  were  in  a fainting  con- 


REMARKS. 


5 


dition;  from  which  however  they  recover  (if  the  dexte- 
rous whaler  profiting  by  the  circumstance,  has  not  mor- 
tally wounded  his  prey),  and  shew  extreme  activity  in 
avoiding  their  foes  ; but  they  rarely  turn  upon  their 
cruel  adversaries,  for  although  men  and  boats  are 
frequently  destroyed  in  these  rencontres,  they  are  more 
the  effect  of  accident  during  violent  contortions  and 
struggles  to  escape,  than  from  any  wilful  attack. 

Yet  the  Baron  Cuvier,  in  the  compilation  of  its  natu- 
ral history,  which  he  has  obtained  from  many  incorrect 
sources,  states:-*- the  terrible  arms,  the  powerful  and 
numerous  teeth  with  which  nature  has  provided  the 
cachalot,  render  it  a terrific  adversary  to  all  the  inha- 
bitants of  the  deep,  even  to  those  which  are  most 
dangerous  to  others ; such  as  the  phocse,  the  balae- 
nop  term,  the  dolphin,  and  the  shark.  So  terrified  are 
all  these  animals  at  the  sight  of  the  cachalot,  that  they 
hurry  to  conceal  themselves  from  him  in  the  sands  or 
mud,  and  often  in  the  precipitancy  of  their  flight,  dash 
themselves  against  the  rocks  with  such  violence  as  to 
cause  instantaneous  death.  It  is  not  therefore  sur- 
prising,9' says  Cuvier,  “ if  the  myriads  of  fishes  on 
which  this  tyrant  preys,  are  struck  with  the  most 
lively  terror  at  his  presence.  So  powerful  is  this  feel- 
ing, that  the  multitudes  of  fish  which  seek  with  avidity 
the  dead  carcasses  of  the  other  cetacea,  dare  not  approach 
the  body  of  the  cachalot  when  he  is  floating  lifeless  on 
the  surface  of  the  ocean." 

From  such  accounts  as  these,  we  might  be  led  to 
believe  that  there  is  no  animal  in  the  creation  more  mon- 


6 


INTRODUCTORY 


strously  ferocious  than  the  sperm  whale  ; not  only  is  his 
true  character  of  being  a quiet  and  inoffensive  animal 
taken  from  him,  but  he  is  represented  on  the  same  page, 
as  the  greedy  and  cruel  pursuer  of  all  kinds  of  marine 
animals,  on  which  of  course  we  are  to  suppose  that  he 
feeds.  “ There  are  some,  however,”  observes  the  Baron 
Cuvier,  “among  the  cachalots  that  pursue  seals,  and  some 
are  sufficiently  audacious  to  attack  many  species  of  the 
balaenae  (whales),  especially  such  individuals  as  are  not 
adults which  certainly  represents  him  as  a formidable 
opponent  to  all  the  marine  tribes,  and  we  infer,  a 
voluptuous  devourer  of  every  animal  which  is  so  un- 
fortunate as  to  wander  within  its  reach. 

But  after  all  these  relations,  it  requires  but  a little 
observation  and  reflection  to  convince  ourselves,  now 
that  we  are  more  acquainted  with  the  real  habits  of  the 
sperm  whale,  that  the  authorities  of  which  previous 
writers  have  availed  themselves  in  the  compilation  of 
their  histories  of  it,  have  all  either  wilfully  misrepre- 
sented the  natural  habits  of  this  animal,  or  have  mis- 
taken the  cachalot  for  some  other  whale  which  possesses 
these  voracious  and  combative  dispositions. 

For  not  only  does  the  sperm  whale  in  reality  happen 
to  be  a most  timid  and  inoffensive  animal  as  I have 
before  stated,  readily  endeavouring  to  escape  from  the 
slightest  thing  which  bears  an  unusual  appearance,  but 
he  is  also  quite  incapable  of  being  guilty  of  the  acts  of 
which  he  is  so  strongly  accused.  The  formation  of  his 
teeth  and  the  size  of  his  gullet  are  quite  sufficient  in 
themselves  to  prove  that  he  is  incapable  of  devouring 


REMARKS. 


7 

the  balaenopterse  (back-finned  whales),  and  balaense  (com- 
mon black  whales);  for  it  would  be  quite  impossible  for 
him  to  swallow  such  monstrous  victims,  as  his  throat  is 
scarcely  sufficiently  capacious  to  admit  the  body  of  a 
man,  and  also  from  the  fact  of  his  teeth  not  possessing 
the  power  of  separating,  or  of  masticating  his  food,  but 
merely  possessing  a prehensile  or  holding  power;  for 
being  provided  only  with  a row  of  widely  separated, 
short-pointed,  conical  teeth  in  the  lower  jaw,  and  none 
in  the  upper,  except  in  a few  instances,  in  which  they 
appear  wholly  rudimentary,  scarcely  projecting  beyond 
the  gums,  he  is  totally  unable  to  wound  seriously, 
much  more  to  tear  to  pieces  and  devour,  the  body  of 
such  an  enormous  animal  as  a balsena,  even  if  it  were 
not  an  adult,  or  one  of  the  b ala)  nop  terse,  in  which  is 
included  the  giant  fin-back. 

As  for  the  dolphins,  seals,  and  sharks  which  he  is 
made  to  chase  with  ravenous  voracity,  until  they  hide 
themselves  in  mud,  or  dash  themselves  against  rocks 
in  attempting  to  escape;  I can  only  observe  with  regard 
to  such  tales,  that  the  sperm  whale  is  never,  or  very 
rarely  seen  near  sand,  mud,  or  rocks,  and  therefore 
would  not  he  likely  to  run  his  victim  so  hard;  nor  can 
I comprehend  the  latter’s  suicidal  attempts  to  rid  them- 
selves of  the  constant  harassing  which  they  are  repre- 
sented as  receiving  from  the  cachalot.  For  although 
the  sperm  whale  at  times  approaches  the  shores  of 
islands  and  other  places  searching  for  their  food,  I never 
saw  them  nearer  than  a mile  or  two,  and  these  were  rare 
instances;  and  it  is  well  known  to  whalers  that  they 


8 


INTRODUCTORY 


are  never  seen  on  soundings,  that  is,  where  the  bottom 
of  the  sea  can  be  touched  with  the  “ lead,55  except  they 
happen  to  be  driven  over  a bank  or  shoal,  as  is  some- 
times  the  case  in  the  “ Seychelle  ” fishery,  and  when  the 
boats  are  in  hot  pursuit,  or  by  some  uncommon  occur- 
rence, and  where  shoals  and  banks  are  divided  by  un- 
fathomable depths  of  ocean.  Besides  it  is  not  very  pro- 
bable that  a sperm  whale  of  eighty  feet  in  length,  and 
proportionable  bulk  could  possess  any  chance  of  chasing 
and  overtaking  any  of  the  dolphin  tribe,  seals,  or  sharks, 
which  move  with  such  dodging  velocity  as  to  place  at 
utter  defiance  the  movements  of  so  immense  an  animal. 

Moreover  this  whale  has  never  been  seen  to  eject 
from  his  stomach,  when  mortally  wounded,  any  other 
animal  but  squid,  which  is  known  to  naturalists  as  the 
t(  sepia  octopus,”  which  is  its  natural  food;  except  when 
near  the  shore  as  in  6e  Volcano  Bay,”  on  the  coast  of 
Japan,  or  in  the  “ Straits  of  Corea,*'  which  join  the 
north  Pacific  with  the  Japanese  Sea,  they  are  some- 
times known  to  eject  fish  about  the  size  of  a small  cod, 
which  inhabit  these  localities  in  great  plenty,  and 
which,  like  the  squid,  in  my  opinion  are  attracted  into 
the  whale’s  mouth  while  he  is  lying  still  for  the  purpose, 
from  the  white  and  glistening  appearance  of  it,  rather 
than  by  any  power  which  the  spermaceti  whale  pos- 
sesses of  capturing  such  little  nimble  animals  by  the 
chase;  but  for  further  considerations  on  this  subject, 
I beg  leave  to  refer  the  reader  to  the  article  entitled 
“ Feeding/*  which  will  be  found  in  another  part  of  this 
work. 


REMARKS® 


9 


And  that  part  of  Cuvier’s  history  which  states,  44  that 
the  multitudes  of  fish  which  seek  with  avidity  the  dead 
carcasses  of  the  other  cetacea,  d&re  not  approach  the 
body  of  the  cachalot,  when  he  is  floating  lifeless  on  the 
surface  of  the  ocean,”  is  just  as  incorrect  as  any  of  the 
foregoing;  for  sometimes  whalers  have  experienced  con- 
siderable losses  in  having  had  young  sperm  whales  half 
eaten  up  in  one  night  by  large  numbers  of  voracious 
sharks,  as  the  whales  have  been  lying  secured  by  the 
ship’s  side,  ready  for  cutting  in  on  the  morrow. 

Great  contradictions  and  dissensions  have  also  at 
various  times  originated  among  naturalists,  relative  to 
the  number  of  the  species  of  this  whale;  yet  notwith- 
standing the  ingenious  reasoning  of  some,  and  the  bold 
and  truthlike  observations  of  others,  with  the  close 
attention  to  the  subject  of  such  men  as  Green,  Aldro- 
vandus,  Willoughby,  Rondelet,  Artedi,  Ray,  Sibbald, 
Linnaeus,  Brisson,  Marten,  and  a crowd  of  other  dis- 
tinguished naturalists,  from  the  impossibility  of  any  of 
these  great  men  making  continuous  observations  upon 
this  interesting  animal,  the  subject  was  still  doomed  to 
remain  an  apparently  impenetrable  mystery. 

And  although  Lacapede  appears  to  be  the  first 
naturalist  who  endeavoured  to  introduce  order  into  this 
department  of  zoology,  yet  even  he  has  entirely  failed 
in  giving  a correct  account  of  this  cetacean,  when  he 
states  that  there  are  eight  species  of  this  whale,  some 

of  which,  he  states,  may  be  known  by  their  dorsal 

> 

fins. 

To  convince  the  reader  of  the  utter  confusion  which 

b 2 


10 


INTRODUCTORY 


exists  among  the  historians  of  this  animal,  it  will  only 
be  necessary  to  state  here,  a few  of  their  published 
opinions,  on  the  supposed  different  species  of  the 
spermaceti  whale. 

Brisson  made  no  less  than  seven  species  of  the 
cachalot,  depending  upon  their  dorsal  fins,  spout-holes, 
and  form  of  their  teeth. 

Linnaeus  followed,  and  reduced  them  to  four  physeters, 
which  he  characterised  by  the  form  of  the  teeth  of  the 
lower  jaw. 

Bonnaterre  increased  them  again  to  six  species,  de- 
pending upon  the  peculiar  modifications  of  the  dorsal 
fins,  or  protuberances,  and  some  small  modifications  in 

■c 

the  form  of  their  teeth. 

Lacapede  next  came,  increasing  the  number  over  all 
his  predecessors,  making  eight  species,  which  he  divided 
into  three  groups  ; viz.  the  cachalots  proper , which  have 
one,  or  several  dorsal  eminences,  and  whose  nostrils  are 
placed  at  the  extremity  of  the  muzzle ; the  physales9 
which  only  differ  from  the  cachalots,  in  having  a small 
dorsal  hump,  and  having  the  nostril  situated  at  a little 
distance  from  the  end  of  the  snout ; and  lastly,  the  phy- 
seters, which  have  a dorsal  fin , and  -whose  nostrils  are 
placed  at  the  end,  or  near  the  end  of  the  muzzle.  The 
first  of  these  groups  (the  cachalots)  are  subdivided. 

Desmarest , however,  thought  proper  to  add  another  to 
those  of  Lacapede,  the  characters  of  which  he  obtained 
from  some  Chinese  drawing,  upon  the  fidelity  of  which 
no  dependence  can  of  course  be  placed. 

So  that  it  is  quite  evident  to  my  mind,  that  Lacapede 


REMARKS. 


11 


must  be  in  error,  if  he  classes  the  spermaceti  whale 
with  those  which  have  dorsal  fins,  without  going  into 
reflections  upon  the  other  species,  which  he  causes  to 
depend  on  differences  which  do  not  exist ; because  in  the 
first  place  the  sperm  whale  has  no  dorsal  fin  whatever, 
merely  having  in  its  place  a hump,  or  rounded  ridge  of 
fat,  in  form  not  unlike  that  of  a camel,  and  which  is 
stripped  off  with  the  blubber,  having  in  its  structure  no 
bones  or  cartilages,  by  which  we  might  even  suppose 
it  to  be  the  rudiment  of  a fin ; while  several  other  kinds 
of  whales  possess  real  dorsal  fins,  as  the  finback,  which 
belongs  to  the  balaense,  and  is  entirely  different  in  its 
form  and  habits,  having  the  head  invested  with  the 
“ baleen,5'  or  screening  apparatus,  by  which  it  feeds, 
like  the  common  black,  or  Greenland  whale,  on  an 
entirely  different  food  to  that  of  the  sperm  whale,  who 
has  in  place  of  the  baleen,  a jaw  furnished  with  teeth, 
“ the  two  branches  of  which,  are  joined  in  the  greater 
part  of  its  length  in  a cylindrical  symphysis,”  and  who 
spouts  from  the  anterior  angle  of  the  head,  while  the 
finback,  like  the  common  whale  of  Greenland,  spouts 
from  the  middle  of  the  top  of  the  same  part.  Others  of 
the  whale  tribe  have  dorsal  fins,  while  they  possess  the 
cylindrical  jaw,  as  the  black  fish,  but  yet  spout  from 
the  forehead,  or  top  of  the  head,  and  do  not  produce 
spermaceti.  While  some,  as  the  Greenland  whale,  spout 
from  the  middle  of  the  top  of  the  head,  have  their  jaws 
furnished  with  baleen,  but  have  neither  dorsal  fins  nor 
hump.  Another  kind,  which  is  well  known  to  whalers, 
as  the  humpbacked  whale,  possesses,  like  the  Greenland 


12 


INTRODUCTORY 


whale,  the  baleen,  and  spouts  from  the  top  of  the  head, 
yet  has  a hump  not  very  dissimilar  to  that  of  the  sperm 
whale. 

So  that  they  resemble  each  other  in  some  respects, 
and  differ  so  widely  in  other  parts  of  their  formation, 
and  also  in  their  habits,  that  they  each  necessarily 
belong  to  distinct  classes  of  beings,  and  convince  me, 
that  they  cannot  properly  be  arranged  in  families,  from 
the  form  or  situation  of  their  fins,  humps,  teeth,  or 
baleen.  However,  it  is  not  my  intention,  were  it  in 
my  power,  to  enter  into  the  inquiry  as  to  the  true 
method  of  dividing  the  cetacea  into  groups,  families, 
genera,  or  species;  but  this  I can  assert  in  contradiction 
to  Lacapede,  and  others  of  the  foregoing  authorities, 
that  there  is  no  more  than  one  species  of  sperm  whale, 
and  this  I say  from  having  particularly  noticed  their 
external  form,  and  also  their  manner  and  habits,  in 
various  parts  of  the  world  very  distant  from  each  other, 
yet  I was  never  led  to  suppose  for  an  instant,  from  their 
observance,  that  more  than  one  species  of  this  kind  of 
whale  exists. 

The  large  full-grown  male,  appeared  the  same  in 
every  part,  from  New  Guinea  to  Japan,  from  Japan  to 
the  coast  of  Peru,  from  Peru  to  our  own  island  ; while 
their  females  coincided  in  every  particular,  having  their 
young  ones  among  them  in  the  same  order,  and  appear- 
ing similar  to  all  others  which  I had  seen  in  every 
respect,  merely  differing  a little  in  colour  or  fatness, 
according  to  the  climate  in  which  they  were  captured, 
as  we  had  many  opportunities  of  observing,  as  they  were 


REMARKS. 


13 


lying  dead  by  the  side  of  the  ship.  Frederick  Cuvier, 
the  brother  of  the  illustrious  Baron,  in  the  most  inter- 
esting and  learned  work  that  ever  appeared,  on  the 
history  of  whales  in  general,  entitled  “ de  V Histoire 
Naturelle  des  Ctiaces ,”  and  which  was  published  so  late 
as  1836,  after  stating  the  difficulty  of  procuring  a cor- 
rect drawing  of  the  sperm  whale,  on  account  of  those 
which  have  been  stranded  on  various  parts  of  Europe 
becoming  so  much  misshapen  from  their  own  weight, 
while  lying  in  the  mud,  and  moreover  from  their  being 
surrounded  by  great  numbers  of  eager  spectators,  re- 
marks, that  “figures  drawn  from  whales  when  floating 
freely,  would  be  in  a condition  to  inspire  more  confi- 
dence, but  if  such  figures  are  possible,  we  believe  that 
science,  as  yet,  does  not  possess  any.”  A paragraph,  in 
the  truth  of  which  every  person  must  agree,  so  far  as  its 
first  part  extends,  but  when  the  outline  of  the  one  given 
by  Captain  Col  nett,  which  we  suppose  was  taken  from 
nature,  with  the  faithful  and  excellent  plate  by  Huggins, 
from  a drawing  made  in  the  South  Seas  over  the  dead 
animal,  and  also  the  sketch,  which  was  given  in  the 
former  edition  of  this  work,  taken  as  it  was,  very  care- 
fully under  the  same  circumstances,  are  considered,  co- 
inciding as  they  all  do  in  every  particular,  the  deficiency 
complained  of  by  F.  Cuvier^  would  seem  to  have  been 
amply  supplied. 

To  prove  the  great  discrepancy  that  exists  between 
the  imaginary  figure  of  F.  Cuvier,  and  that  taken  from 
actual  observation,  it  will  only  be  necessary  for  the 
satisfaction  of  those  personally  unacquainted  with  the 


14 


INTRODUCTORY 


subject,  to  subjoin  a comparative  outline  sketch  of  the 
two. 


Some  of  the  errors  with  which  naturalists  have  been 
involved,  may  have  arisen  from  the  great  disproportion 
in  size  which  exists  between  the  male  and  female  of 
these  animals,  and  which  is  very  great,  the  adult  female 
bearing  a proportion  of  only  about  one-fifth  to  the  size 
of  the  large  adult  male  ; but  this  is  not  altogether  to  be 
understood  in  regard  of  length,  but  of  their  general 
bulk,  for  the  females  are  longer  in  proportion  to  their 
circumference  than  the  males,  being  altogether  more 
slenderly  formed,  which  gives  them  that  appearance  of 
lightness  and  comparative  weakness,  which  the  females 


REMARKS. 


15 


of  most  animals  possess  ; and  on  this  account  the  female 
heretofore  may  have  been  taken  for  a different  species 
of  the  cachalot,  when  her  size  has  been  compared  with 
that  of  the  large  male,  particularly  when  it  is  known 
that  the  female  of  the  common  Greenland  whale  is  in 
most  instances  the  larger. 

The  Baron  Cuvier,  in  his  remarks  upon  the  sperm 
whale,  states,  “ that  he  is  another  of  those  giants  of  the 
main,  whose  colossal  structure  and  tyrannical  dominion 
render  them  truly  formidable ; this  cachalot  is  more 
lively  and  active  than  the  generality  of  the  cetacea,  and 
is  only  less  bulky  than  the  common  whale,  of  which  he 
is  a most  dangerous  rival,  though  less  powerful  than 
that  first  of  the  marine  mammalia.”  This  assertion  is 
another  instance,  showing  how  correctness  and  its 
opposite  may  be  placed  together ; for  although  some  of 
these  remarks  are  true,  as  far  as  relates  to  the  superior 
activity  of  the  sperm  whale,  yet,  when  it  is  observed 
that  he  is  “ less  powerful  ” and  “ less  bulky  ” than  “ his 
dangerous  rival,”  we  are  led  to  suppose  that  the  learned 
author  had  depended  too  much  on  the  mistaken  evidence 
of  others  ; for  Scoresby,  in  his  account  of  the  size  and 
length  of  the  Greenland  whale,  states  that  about  seventy, 
or  seventy-two  feet,  would  measure  the  longest  that  he 
saw ; while  a male  spermaceti  whale,  which  we  captured 
at  the  Japan  fishery,  measured  the  enormous  length  of 
eighty-four  feet,  and  its  circumference,  in  this  instance, 
was  not  less  than  that  of  a Greenland  whale  of  the 
largest  size  ; so  that,  if  size  is  to  be  taken  into  con- 
sideration to  entitle  either  of  them  to  claim  the  dominion 


16 


INTRODUCTORY 


of  the  ocean,  the  sperm  whale,  at  present,  can  certainly 
demand  the  place ; and  if  his  size  is  so  superior,  pos- 
sessing also  much  greater  activity,  we  can  scarcely  deem 
him  the  second  of  the  marine  mammalia,  or  a less 
powerful ” than  his  northern  rival. 

But,  if  naturalists  have  erred  respecting  the  disposi- 
tion, the  food,  species,  form,  and  size  of  this  leviathan, 
they  have  not  been  less  deceived  in  regard  to  his 
breathing,  during  which  they  have  represented  him  as 
throwing  up  water  with  the  spout ; this  has  been 
reiterated,  not  only  by  naturalists,  but  also  by  poets  and 
painters,  from  the  earliest  periods— from  Pliny’s  down 
to  the  present  time,  the  notion  has  existed  that  he  con- 
stantly ejects  water  with  his  breath,  which  has  caused 
F.  Cuvier  to  indulge  also  in  this  belief,  because,  as  he 
states,  ei  so  many  persons  have  been  witnesses  of  it,  that 
he  cannot  for  a moment  doubt  the  recital.” 

I can  only  say,  when  I find  myself  again  in  opposi- 
tion to  those  old  and  received  notions,  that,  out  of  the 
thousands  of  sperm  whales  which  I have  seen  during 
my  wanderings  in  the  south  and  north  Pacific  Oceans,  I 
have  never  observed  one  of  them  to  eject  a column  of 
water  from  the  nostril.  I have  seen  them  at  a distance, 
and  I have  been  within  a few  yards  of  several  hundreds 
of  them,  and  I never  saw  water  pass  from  the  spout- 
hole.  But  the  column  of  thick  and  dense  vapour  which 
is  certainly  ejected,  is  exceedingly  likely  to  mislead  the 
judgment  of  the  casual  observer  in  these  matters  ; and 
this  column  does  indeed  appear  very  much  like  a jet  of 
water,  when  seen  a£  the  distance  of  one  or  two  miles  on 


REMARKS. 


17 


a clear  day,  because  of  the  condensation  of  the  vapour, 
which  takes  place  the  moment  it  escapes  from  the  nostril, 
and  its  consequent  opacity,  which  makes  it  appear  of  a 
white  colour,  and  which  is  not  observed  when  the  whale 
is  close  to  the  spectator,  and  it  then  appears  only  like  a 
jet  of  white  steam  ; the  only  water  in  addition  is  the 
small  quantity  that  may  be  lodged  in  the  external  fissure 
of  the  spout-hole,  when  the  animal  raises  it  above  the 
surface  to  breathe,  and  which  is  blown  up  into  the  air 
with  the  spout,  and  may  probably  assist  in  condensing 
the  vapour  of  which  it  is  formed. 

It  has,  however,  been  stated  by  some  naturalists  that 
it  is  only  at  times  that  this  whale  projects  w7ater  from 
the  nostril,  and  that  is  at  the  time,  they  say,  of  his 
feeding.  How  far  such  an  observation  can  apply  to  the 
Greenland  whale,  which  feeds  near  the  surface,  will  be 
noticed  in  the  conclusion  of  these  remarks;  but  I can 
state  here,  that  such  an  observation  cannot  hold  good 
with  regard  to  the  sperm  whale,  for  that  creature  feeds 
far  below  the  surface,  and,  in  so  doing,  the  large  male 
continues  in  the  depths  of  the  ocean  from  an  hour  to  an 
hour  and  twenty  minutes,  without  once  shewing  himself 
above ; so  that,  if  he  wishes  to  eject  water  from  the 
mouth  through  the  nostril,  to  avoid  swallowing  it  (if, 
indeed,  he  has  any  anatomical  arrangement  for  so  doing), 
it  must  be  performed  in  the  depths  of  his  native  element, 
into  which  he  descends  to  feed,  and  therefore  the  opera- 
tion is  remote  from  observation. 

This  general  opinion,  like  that  of  the  sperm  whale’s 
voice,  is  not  only  entertained  by  F.  Cuvier,  but  among 


18 


INTRODUCTORY 


other  recent  writers  on  these  subjects : Mr.  T.  Bell,  in  his 
valuable  and  beautiful  work  on  British  quadrupeds  and 
marine  mammalia,  favours  the  opinions  of  the  others 
who  have  preceded  him.  This  misconception  is  also 
disseminated  in  the  volume  upon  cetacea  in  the  Natu- 
ralist’s Library,  conducted  by  Sir  William  Jardine,  who 
has  also  fallen  into  great  errors  with  regard  to  the  sperm 
whale’s  feeding,  and  the  size  of  the  female.  And  al- 
though that  gentleman  has  thought  proper  to  fill  his 
chapter  on  the  natural  history  of  the  sperm  whale  en- 
tirely from  the  first  little  edition  of  this  work,  he  does 
not  appear  to  be  convinced  of  its  veracity,  and  at  the 
same  time  (I  am  compelled  to  observe)  to  display  a con- 
siderable want  of  accurate  information  on  the  subject, 
when  he  supposes  that  the  food  of  the  sperm  whale 
is  similar  to  that  of  the  Greenland  whale ; a sup- 
position manifestly  untenable,  when  we  regard  the 
very  different  apparatus  for  the  prehension  and  reten- 
tion of  food  in  the  mouths  of  the  two  animals.  The 
one  provided  with  a complex  and  wonderfully  ar- 
ranged screen  or  sieve,  for  the  purpose  of  separating 
minute  animals  from  the  water  that  passes  through  its 
mouth ; and  the  other  furnished  with  short  but  pointed 
teeth,  evidently  intended  for  the  seizure  of  larger  ob- 
jects, and  totally  unfitted  for  the  function  performed  by 
the  former. 

Moreover,  the  fact  of  the  loligo  affording  the  princi- 
pal food  of  the  sperm  whale,  is  a well  and  long  known 
fact,  and  an  instance  of  this  creature  being  found  in  the 
stomach  of  a sperm  whale  stranded  on  the  coast  of  Nor- 


REMARKS. 


19 


folk,  is  recorded  by  Sir  Thomas  Brown,  so  long  ago 
as  1686. 

Mr.  Bennett,  in  a paper  which  he  read,  not  long 
since,  before  the  Zoological  Society,  also  stated  that  the 
sperm  whale  has  the  power  of  throwing  up  water  with 
the  expired  air  at  particular  times  ; but  from  what  I 
have  heard,  I believe  the  observations  which  he  made 
were  not  deemed  conclusive  of  the  fact,  and  I have  not 
yet  been  able  to  peruse  his  paper  myself. 

In  the  conclusion  of  this  subject  I may  be  allowed  to 
state:— that  I have  been  also  very  close  to  the  baleen  a 
my  sticetus  when  it  has  been  feeding  and  breathing,  and  yet 
I never  saw  even  that  animal  differ  in  the  latter  respect 
from  the  sperm  whale  in  the  nature  of  the  spout ; and  even 
in  porpoises,  which  I have  seen  in  hundreds  of  instances 
playing  or  gamboling  about  the  bows  of  our  ship  as 
she  has  been  sailing  along,  yet  in  not  a solitary  instance 
did  I ever  observe  anything  but  vapour  dart  from  their 
nostrils,  and  which  is  but  the  work  of  an  instant,  for 
they  are  not  on  the  surface  more  than  that  time,  when 
they  not  only  perform  their  expiration  but  inspiration, 
and  again  disappear  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye. 

Again,  it  has  been  observed  by  the  same  naturalist, 
who  has  been  so  frequently  noticed  in  these  remarks 
because  he  has  been  the  most  prominent  historian  on  the 
subject  with  which  we  are  engaged,  that  the  spring  is  the 
time  when  the  intercourse  of  the  sexes  takes  place, 
which  if  true  would  certainly  lead  us  to  expect  only  at 
particular  seasons  a certain  increase  of  these  valuable 
animals — but  this  is  not  the  case,  as  we  find  young  sperm 


20 


INTRODUCTORY 


whales,  at  all  seasons  of  the  year,  accompanying  the 
groups,  or  6t  schools  53  of  females,  wherever  or  at  what- 
ever time  they  may  be  fallen  in  with  : for  an  instance— 
if  a ship  on  the  Japan  fishery  or  Bonin  Islands,  falls  in 
with  a “ school 55  of  female  whales  in  May,  which  is  the 
first  commencement  of  the  fishing  season,  they  are  sure  to 
see  young  sucking  whales  among  them  ; and  if  they  also 
fall  in  with  others  of  the  same  sex  in  the  following 
August,  September,  or  October,  the  young  are  also  cer- 
tainly met  with— thus  demonstrating,  that  there  is  no 
particular  time  set  apart  by  nature  for  the  sexual  inter- 
course of  these  animals,  but  that  they  meet  at  all  seasons 
of  the  year : the  same  observations  hold  good  at  the  New 
Guinea  fishery,  and  from  all  the  information  that  I can 
obtain,  also  at  the  “ Seychelle”  and  “ Timor 53  fisheries. 

The  groups,  herds,  or  44  schools, which  are  formed  by 
the  sperm  whale,  are  of  two  kinds firstly,  by  the 
females,  which  are  accompanied  by  their  young  and  one 
or  two  adult  males ; and,  secondly,  by  the  young  and 
half-grown  males,  but  the  large  and  fully  grown  males 
always  go  singly  in  search  of  food : but  M.  F.  Cuvier 
lias  conjectured,  that  when  they  are  seen  alone,  that  it  is 
14  merely  accidental,  and  not  natural.3"  His  brother  has 
also  stated,  that  the  left  eye  of  the  cachalot  is  much 
smaller  than  the  other,  so  that  fishermen  attack  him  on 
that  side,  on  which  his  vision  is  less  perfect,  in  order  to 
more  readily  elude  his  observation.  Of  the  first  of  these 
remarks*  I feel  myself  incompetent  either  to  contradict, 
or  confirm  it  positively  ; but  I can  assert  that  I never 
saw  a whaler  prefer  either  side  of  the  whale,  but  that 


REMARKS. 


21 


which  was  nearest  or  most  convenient  to  him  at  the 
moment  of  attack — neither  have  I ever  heard  them  make 
use  of  a single  observation  to  confirm  such  an  assertion,, 
But  if  the  great  Baron  Cuvier  and  his  no  less  learned 
brother,  have  both  been  so  much  misled  in  the  histories 
which  they  have  given  of  the  manners  and  habits  of  the 
sperm  whale,  it  has  arisen  from  the  many  difficulties 
they  have  had  to  deal  with,  in  endeavouring  to  unravel 
the  inextricable  veil  in  which  the  true  history  of  this 
animal  has  been  wrapped  by  a multitude  of  writers, 
who  have  themselves  either  wilfully  misrepresented  the 
nature  of  this  creature,  with  which  they  have  pretended 
to  be  acquainted,  or  who  have  depended  upon  the 
accounts  of  old  voyagers,  who  have  delighted  in  mixing 
fiction  with  truth,  that  miracles  and  wonders  of  all  kinds 
might  appear  to  have  been  their  constant  companions* 
Yet  long  ago,  the  powerful  and  scrutinizing  mind  of  the 
Baron  began  to  perforate  the  mist  which  hung  over  this 
branch  of  natural  history ; for  we  find  him  throwing  out 
the  following  suspicions,  which  serve  to  shew  the  nature 
of  his  real  opinion,  upon  the  various  accounts  which 
surrounded  him  on  the  number  of  species  of  the  cacha- 
lot. “ Are  there/5  he  inquires,  u any  cachalots  with  an 
elevated  dorsal  fin  ? Are  there  any  with  the  spiracles 
pierced  on  the  forehead,  on  the  middle  of  the  head? 
Are  there  any  in  which  the  branches  of  the  lower  jaw 
are  not  joined  for  most  of  their  length  in  a cylindrical 
symphysis  ?” 

We  are  proud  in  being  enabled,  thus  far,  to  confirm 
the  suspicions  of  Cuvier,  and  to  finish  these  humble 


22 


INTRODUCTORY  REMARKS. 


remarks  by  observing,  that  as  far  as  our  own  researches 
on  this  whale  have  extended,  and  we  have  visited  him  in 
his  own  unfathomable  and  vast  domain,  for  the  purpose 
of  observing  his  habits  and  form,  we  have  never  had 
reason  to  suppose  that  more  than  one  species  of  sper- 
maceti whale  exists.  And  not  until  the  queries  insti- 
tuted by  Cuvier  are  answered  in  the  affirmative,  and 
proved,  “ and  to  be  proved  otherwise  than  by  figures 
drawn  by  common  sailors—not  until  such  beings  have 
been  carefully  observed  by  enlightened  men— not  until 
their  osseous  parts  have  been  deposited  in  collections, 
where  they  can  be  verified  by  naturalists,  shall  we  be 
justified  in  admitting  more  than  one  kind  of  sperm 
whale  into  the  catalogue  of  animals,” 


23 


CHAPTER  I. 

EXTERNAL  FORM  AND  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE 
SPERM  WHALE. 


Before  proceeding  to  the  account  of  the  habits  of  the 
sperm  whale,  I have  thought  that  it  might  be  interesting 
to  prefix  a short  description  of  its  external  form,  and 
some  anatomical  points  in  its  conformation.  By  refer- 
ence to  the  prefixed  engravings,  the  following  description 
will  be  much  more  readily  understood: 


Fig.  1. 


Fig.  1 represents  the  outline  of  the  entire  form.  Fig.  2. 

Fig.  2,  that  of  the  anterior  aspect  of  the  head. 

Fig.  1 — a , the  nostril  or  spout-hole ; by  the  situation 
of  the  case  ; c , the  junk  ; d,  the  bunch  of  the  neck  ; e, 
the  eye;  f,  the  fin;  g , the  spiral  strips,  or  blanket  pieces;  ( 
hy  the  hump  ; i,  the  ridge  ; Jc , the  small ; l,  the  tail  or 
flukes  ; B,  a harpoon  ; C,  a lance. 

Fig.  2 — a,  the  lines  forming  the  square  are  intended  to 
represent  the  flat  anterior  part  of  the  head. 


24 


FORM  AND  PECULIARITIES 


The  head  of  the  sperm  whale  presents  in  front  a very 
thick  blunt  extremity,  called  the  snout  or  nose,  and 
constitutes  about  one-third  of  the  whole  length  of  the 
animal — at  its  junction  with  the  body  is  a large  pro- 
tuberance on  the  back,  called  by  the  whalers  the  44  bunch 
of  the  neck  immediately  behind  this,  or  at  what  might 
be  termed  the  shoulder,  is  the  thickest  part  of  the  body, 
which  from  this  point  gradually  tapers  off  to  the  tail, 
but  it  does  not  become  much  smaller  for  about  another 
third  of  the  whole  length,  when  the  44  small,”  as  it  is 
called,  or  tail,  commences ; and  at  this  point  also,  on  the 
back,  is  a large  prominence  of  a pyramidal  form,  called 
the  44  hump,”  from  which  a series  of  smaller  processes 
run  half  way  down  the  44  small,”  or  tail,  constituting 
what  is  called  by  whalers  the  44  ridge.”  The  body  then 
contracts  so  much,  as  to  become  finally  not  thicker  than 
the  body  of  a man,  and  terminates  by  becoming  expanded 
on  the  sides  into  the  44  flukes,”  or  tail  properly  speaking. 
The  two  flukes  constitute  a large  triangular  fin,  resem- 
bling in  some  respects  the  tail  of  fishes,  but  differing  in 
being  placed  horizontally ; there  is  a slight  notch,  or 
depression,  between  the  flukes,  posteriorly— they  are 
about  six  or  eight  feet  in  length,  and  from  twelve  to 
fourteen  in  breadth  in  the  largest  males.  The  chest  and 
belly  are  narrower  than  the  broadest  part  of  the  back, 
and  taper  off  evenly  and  beautifully  towards  the  tail, 
giving  what  by  sailors  is  termed  a 44  clear  run,” — the 
depth  of  the  head  and  body  is  in  all  parts  except  the 
tail  greater  than  the  width.  The  head  viewed  in  front, 
as  in  fig.  2,  presents  a broad,  somewhat  flattened  surface, 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


•25 


rounded,  and  contracted  above,  considerably  expanded 
on  the  sides,  and  gradually  contracted  below,  so  as  in 
some  degree  to  attain  a resemblance  to  the  cutwater  of  a 
ship. 

At  the  angle  formed  by  the  anterior  and  superior  sur- 
faces on  the  left  side,  is  placed  the  single  blowing-hole, 
or  nostril,  which  in  the  dead  animal  presents  the  ap- 
pearance of  a slit  or  fissure,  in  form  resembling  an  /, 
extending  longitudinally,  and  about  twelve  inches  in 
length. 

This  nostril,  however,  is  surrounded  by  several 
muscles,  which  in  the  living  state  are  for  the  purpose  of 
modifying  its  shape  and  dimensions,  according  to  the 
necessities  of  respiration,  similar  to  those  which  act  upon 
the  nostrils  of  land  animals. 

In  the  right  side  of  the  nose,  and  upper  surface  of  the 
head,  is  a large,  almost  triangular-shaped  cavity,  called 
by  whalers  the  ucase,5J  which  is  lined  with  a beautiful 
glistening  membrane,  and  covered  by  a thick  layer  of mus- 
cular fibres  and  small  tendons,  running  in  various  direc- 
tions, and  finally  united  by  common  integuments.  This 
cavity  is  for  the  purpose  of  secreting  and  containing  an 
oily  fluid,  which,  after  death,  concretes  into  a granulated 
substance  of  a yellowish  colour,  the  spermaceti.  The 
size  of  the  case  may  be  estimated,  when  it  is  stated  that 
in  a large  whale  it  not  unfrequently  contains  a ton,  or 
more  than  ten  large  barrels  of  spermaceti ! 

Beneath  the  case  and  nostril,  and  projecting  beyond 
the  lower  jaw,  is  a thick  mass  of  elastic  substance  called 
the  “junk:,?  it  is  formed  of  a dense  cellular  tissue, 

c 


26 


FORM  AND  PECULIARITIES 


strengthened  by  numerous  strong  tendinous  fibres,  and 
infiltrated  with  very  fine  sperm  oil  and  spermaceti. 

The  mouth  extends  nearly  the  whole  length  of  the 
head.  Both  the  jaws,  but  especially  the  lower,  are  in 
front  contracted  to  a very  narrow  point,  and  when  the 
mouth  is  closed,  the  lower  jaw  is  received  within  a sort 
of  cartilaginous  lip,  or  projection  of  the  upper  one  ; but 
principally  in  front,  for  further  back,  at  the  sides,  and 
towards  the  angle  of  the  mouth,  both  jaws  are  furnished 
with  tolerably  well  developed  lips : in  the  lower  jaw 
are  forty-two  teeth,  of  a formidable  size,  but  conical 
shape ; there  are  none,  however,  in  the  upper,  which 
instead  presents  depressions  corresponding  to,  and  for 
the  reception  of,  the  points  of  those  in  the  lower  jaw,— 
sometimes,  however,  a few  rudimentary  teeth  may  be 
found  situated  in  the  upper  jaw,  but  never  projecting 
beyond  the  gums,  and  upon  which  those  in  the  lower 
jaw  strike  when  the  mouth  is  closed. 

The  tongue  is  small,  of  a white  colour,  and  does  not 
appear  to  possess  the  power  of  very  extended  motion. 

The  throat  is  capacious  enough  to  give  passage  to  the 
body  of  a man  ; In  this  respect  presenting  a strong  con- 
trast with  the  contracted  gullet  of  the  Greenland  whale. 

The  mouth  is  lined  throughout  with  a pearly  white 
membrane,  which  becomes  continuous  at  the  lips,  and 
borders  with  the  common  integument,  where  it  becomes 
of  a dark-brown  or  black  colour. 

The  eyes  are  small,  in  comparison  with  the  size  of  the 
animal,  and  are  furnished  with  eyelids,  the  lower  of 
which  is  the  more  moveable : they  are  placed  a little 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


above,  and  behind  the  angle  of  the  mouth,  at  the  widest 
part  of  the  head.  At  a short  distance  behind  the  eyes, 
are  the  external  openings  of  the  ears,  of  size  sufficient 
to  admit  a small  quill,  and  unprovided  with  any  exter- 
nal auricular  appendage. 

Behind,  and  not  far  from  the  posterior  angle  of  the 
mouth,  are  placed  the  swimming  paws,  or  fins,  which  are 
analogous  in  their  formation  to  the  anterior  extremities 
of  other  animals,  or  the  arms  of  man ; they  are  not 
much  used  as  instruments  of  progression,  but  probably 
in  giving  a direction  to  that  motion  in  balancing  the 
body  in  sinking  suddenly,  and  occasionally  in  support- 
ing their  young. 

In  a full-grown  male  sperm  whale,  of  the  largest 
size,  or  about  eighty-four  feet  in  length,  the  dimensions 
may  be  given  as  follow : — depth  of  head  from  eight  to 
nine  feet, —breadth,  from  five  to  six  feet,— depth  of  body 
seldom  exceeds  twelve  or  fourteen  feet,  so  that  the  cir- 
cumference of  the  largest  sperm  whale  of  eighty  or 
eighty-four  feet  will  seldom  exceed  thirty-six  feet, — ■ 
the  swimming  paws  or  fins,  are  about  six  feet  long  and 
three  broad ; the  dimensions  of  the  flukes  or  tail  have 
been  previously  mentioned. 

In  reviewing  this  description  of  the  external  form, 
and  some  of  the  organs  of  the  sperm  whale,  it  will  per 
haps  not  be  uninteresting  if  some  comparison  is  insti- 
tuted between  them  and  the  corresponding  points  of  the 
Greenland  whale.  In  doing  this,  the  remarkable  adapta- 
tion of  form  and  parts  to  different  habits,  situation,  and 
food,  will  not  fail  to  strike  every  one  with  admiration. 


28  FORM  AND  PECULIARITIES 

One  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  sperm  whale,  which  strikes 
at  first  sight  every  beholder,  is  the  apparently  dispropor- 
tionate  and  unwieldy  bulk  of  the  head;  but  this  peculiarity, 
instead  of  being,  as  might  be  supposed,  an  impediment 
to  the  freedom  of  the  animahs  motion  in  his  native  ele- 
ment, is.  in  fact,  on  the  contrary  in  some  respects  very 
conducive  to  his  lightness  and  agility,  if  such  a term  can 
with  propriety  be  applied  to  such  an  enormous  creature  ; 
for  a great  part  of  the  bulk  of  the  head  is  made  up  of  a 
large  thin  membranous  case,  containing,  during  life,  a 
thin  oil  of  much  less  specific  gravity  than  water;  below 
which  again  is  the  junk,  which,  although  heavier  than  the 
spermaceti,  is  still  lighter  than  the  element  in  which  the 
wThale  moves  ; consequently  the  head  taken  as  a whole, 
is  lighter  specifically  than  any  other  part  of  the  body, 
and  will  always  have  a tendency  to  rise  at  least  so  far 
above  the  surface  as  to  elevate  the  nostril  or  “ blow- 
hole" sufficiently  for  all  purposes  of  respiration,  and  more 
than  this,  a very  slight  effort  on  the  part  of  the  fish  would 
only  be  necessary  to  raise  the  whole  of  the  anterior  fiat 
surface  of  the  nose  out  of  the  water ; in  case  the  animal 
should  wish  to  increase  his  speed  to  the  utmost,  the 
narrow  inferior  surface,  which  has  been  before  stated  to 
bear  some  resemblance  to  the  cutwater  of  a ship,  and 
wrhich  would  in  fact  answer  the  same  purpose  to  the 
whale,  would  be  the  only  part  exposed  to  the  pressure  of 
the  water  in  front,  enabling  him  thus  to  pass  with  the 
greatest  celerity  and  ease  through  the  boundless  track  of 
his  wide  domain. 

It  is  in  this  shape  of  the  head  that  the  sperm  whale 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


29 


differs  in  the  most  remarkable  degree  from  the  Greenland 
whale,  the  shape  of  whose  head  more  resembles  that  of 
the  porpoise,  and  in  it  the  nostril  is  situated  much  farther 
back,  rendering  it  seldom  or  ever  necessary  for  the  nose 
to  be  elevated  above  the  surface  of  the  water ; and  when 
swimming  even  at  the  greatest  speed,  the  Greenland 
whale  keeps  nearly  the  whole  of  the  head  under  it,  but 
as  his  head  tapers  off  evenly  in  front,  this  circumstance 
does  not  much  impede  his  motion,  the  rate  of  which  is, 
however,  never  equal  to  that  of  the  greatest  rate  of  the 
sperm  whale. 

It  seems,  indeed,  in  point  of  fact,  that  this  purpose  of 
rendering  the  head  of  light  specific  gravity,  is  the  only 
use  of  this  mass  of  oil  and  spermaceti,  although  some 
have  supposed,  and  not  without  some  degree  of  probabi- 
lity, that  the  “ junk”  especially  may  be  serviceable  in 
obviating  the  injurious  effects  of  concussion,  should  the 
whale  happen  to  meet  with  any  obstacle  when  in  full 
career.  This  supposition,  however,  would  appear  hardly 
tenable,  when  we  consider  the  Greenland  whale,  although 
living  among  the  rock-like  icebergs  of  the  arctic  seas, 
has  no  such  convenient  provision,  and  with  senses  pro- 
bably in  all,  and  certainly  in  one  respect  less  acute  than 
those  of  the  sperm  whale,  on  which  account  it  would  seem 
requisite  for  him  to  possess  this  defence  rather  than  the 
sperm  whale,  whose  habitation  is  for  the  most  part  in  the 
smiling  latitudes  of  the  southern  seas.  Considering  the 
habits  and  mode  of  feeding,  and  the  superior  activity 
and  apparent  intelligence  of  the  sperm  whale,  we  shall  be 
prepared  to  expect  that  he  must  possess  a corresponding 


FORM  AND  PECULIARITIES 


superiority  in  his  external  senses ; and  we  accordingly 
find,  that  he  enjoys  a more  perfect  organ  of  hearing,  in 
having  an  external  opening  of  considerable  size  for  the 
purpose  of  conveying  sounds  to  the  internal  ear  more 
readily  and  acutely  than  could  be  done  through  the  dense 
and  thick  integument,  which  is  continued  over  the 
auricular  opening  in  the  northern  whale. 

Although  the  eyes  in  both  animals  are  very  small  in 
comparison  with  their  bulk,  yet  it  is  remarked  that  they 
are  tolerably  quick -sighted.  I am  not  aware  that  the 
sperm  whale  possesses  in  this  respect  any  superiority. 

Passing  to  the  mouth,  we  again  observe  a very  re- 
markable difference  in  the  conformation  of  the  two  ani- 
mals ; as  in  place  of  the  enormous  plates  of  whalebone 
which  are  found  attached  to  the  upper  jaw  of  the  Green- 
land whale,  we  in  the  sperm  whale  only  find  depressions 
for  the  reception  of  the  teeth  of  the  lower  jaw;  organs 
which  again  are  totally  wanting  in  the  other.  Corre- 
sponding with  these  distinctions,  which  plainly  point  out 
that  the  food  of  the  two  whales  must  be  very  different, 
we  find  a remarkable  difference  in  the  size  of  the  gullet. 

The  several  humps,  or  ridges,  on  the  back  of  the 
sperm  whale  constitute  another  difference  in  their  external 
aspect;  these  prominences  are  however  not  altogether 
peculiar  to  the  sperm  whale,  as  that  which  is  called  by 
whalers  the  “humpback^  possesses  a prominence  on 
the  back  not  very  dissimilar  to  that  of  the  sperm  whale, 
which  has  been  noticed  before  in  the  introductory  re- 
marks, and  which  induced  Lacapedd  to  divide  the  genus 
Balsena  into  those  with  a hump,  and  those  without; 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE, 


31 


employing  the  name  Balaena  for  the  latter,  and  styling 
the  others  Balaenoptera. 

I have  before  adverted  to  the  sharp  cutwater-like 
conformation  of  the  under  part  of  the  head  in  the  sperm 
whale,  and  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that  the  same  part  of 
the  Greenland  whale  is  nearly,  if  not  altogether,  flat. 

The  skin  of  the  sperm  whale,  as  of  all  other  cetaceous 
animals,  is  without  scales,  smooth,  but  occasionally,  in 
old  whales,  wrinkled,  and  frequently  marked  on  the 
sides  by  linear  impressions,  appearing  as  if  rubbed 
against  some  angular  body.  The  colour  of  the  skin, 
over  the  greatest  part  of  its  extent,  is  very  dark,  most  so 
on  the  upper  part  of  the  head,  the  back,  and  on  the 
flukes,  in  which  situation  it  is  in  fact  sometimes  black, 
on  the  sides  it  gradually  assumes  a lighter  tint,  till  on 
the  breast  it  becomes  silvery  grey . 

In  different  individuals  there  is,  however,  considerable 
variety  of  shade,  and  some  are  even  piebald.  Old 
“ bulls,”  as  full-grown  males  are  called  by  whalers,  have 
generally  a portion  of  grey  on  the  nose  immediately 
above  the  fore-part  of  the  upper-jaw,  and  they  are  then 
said  to  be  “ grey-headed.” 

In  young  whales  the  “ black  skin,”  as  it  is  called,  is 
about  three-eighths  of  an  inch  thick,  but  in  old  ones  it 
is  not  more  than  one-eighth. 

Immediately  beneath  the  black  skin  is  the  blubber  or 
fat,  which  is  contained  in  a cellular  membrane,  and 
which  is  much  strengthened  by  numerous  interlacements 
of  ligamentous  fibres,  which  has  induced  Professor  Jacob 
to  consider  the  whole  thickness  of  blubber  to  be  the  cutis 


82  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


vera,  or  true  skin,  infiltrated  with  oil,  or  fatty  matters.  Its 
thickness  on  the  breast  of  a large  whale  is  about  fourteen 
inches,  and  on  most  other  parts  of  the  body  it  measures 
from  eight  to  eleven  inches.  The  head  is  not,  however, 
supplied  with  this  covering,  having  only  the  black  skin, 
or  cutis,  which  lies  close  to  a layer  of  very  dense  cellu- 
lar tissue,  under  which  is  seen  a considerable  thickness 
of  numerous  small  tendons,  intermixed  with  muscular 
fibres. 

This  is  more  especially  observed  on  the  top  and  upper 
third  of  the  head,  surrounding  the  case,  as  lower  down 
we  find  the  black  skin  lying  close  to  the  peculiar  struc- 
ture of  the  junk* 

This  thick  covering  of  skin,  blubber,  or  fat,  is  called 
by  South  Sea  whalers  the  “blanket.^  It  is  of  a light 
yellowish  colour,  and,  when  melted  down,  furnishes  the 
sperm  oil.  It  also  serves  two  excellent  purposes  to  the 
whale,  in  rendering  it  buoyant,  and  in  furnishing  it  with 
a warm  protection  from  the  coldness  of  the  surrounding 
element ; in  this  last  respect  answering  well  to  the 
name  bestowed  upon  it  by  the  sailors3 


33 


CHAPTER  IL 

HABITS  OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


Fig.  1.  Fig.  2.  Fig . 3. 


It  is  a matter  of  great  astonishment  that  the  consider- 
ation of  the  habits  of  so  interesting,  and  in  a commercial 
point  of  view  of  so  important  an  animal,  should  have  been 
so  entirely  neglected,  or  should  have  excited  so  little 
curiosity  among  the  numerous,  and  many  of  them  com- 
petent observers,  that  of  late  years  must  have  possessed 
the  most  abundant  and  the  most  convenient  opportu- 
nities of  witnessing  their  habitudes.  I am  not  vain 
enough  to  pretend  that  the  few  following  pages  include 
a perfect  sketch  of  this  subject,  as  regards  the  sperm 
whale  ; but  I flatter  myself  that  somewhat  of  novelty 
and  originality  will  be  found  justly  ascribable  to  the 
observations  I have  put  together ; they  are  at  all  events 
the  fruit  of  long  and  attentive  consideration. — For  con- 
venience of  description,  the  habits  of  this  animal  are  given 
under  the  heads  of  feeding,  swimming,  breathing,  etc. 

c 2 


84 


HABITS  OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE  l 


FEEDING. 

The  food  of  the  sperm  whale  consists  almost  wholly 
of  an  animal  of  the  cuttle-fish  kind,  called  by  sailors  the 
squid/5  and  by  naturalists  the  a sepia  octopus/5  the 
form  and  natural  history  of  which  will  be  fully  noticed 
under  the  head  of  “ Nature  of  the  Sperm  Whale’s  Food.” 
See  Chapter  vii. 

This  squid,  or  sepia,  at  least  forms  the  principal  part 
of  his  sustenance  when  at  a distance  from  shore,  or  what 
is  termed  “ off-shore  ground/’  but  when  met  with  nearer 
land,  he  has  been  known,  when  mortally  or  severely 
wounded,  to  eject  from  his  stomach  quantities  of  small 
fish,  which  are  met  with  in  great  abundance  in  the  bays 
and  somewhat  near  the  shore,  especially  in  Volcano  Bay 
on  the  coast  of  Japan,  and  in  the  Straits  of  Corea,  which 
joins  the  Pacific  Ocean  with  the  sea  of  Japan;  he  some- 
times, however,  throws  up  fish  as  large  as  a moderate 
sized  salmon.  It  would  be  difficult  to  believe  that  so 
large  and  unwieldy  an  animal  as  this  whale  could  ever 
catch  a sufficient  quantity  of  such  small  animals,  if  he 
had  to  pursue  them  individually  for  his  food  ; and  I am 
not  aware  that  either  the  fish  he  sometimes  lives  upon, 
or  the  squid,  are  ever  found  in  shoals,  or  closely  con- 
gregated, except  in  one  solitary  instance  recorded  by 
Captain  Colnett,  regarding  the  “ squid,”  in  which  he 
states  that,  while  off  the  Galapago’s  Islands  “ neither 
himself  nor  any  of  the  oldest  whalers  had  ever  seen  the 
squid  in  shoals  before.”  It  remains,  then,  to  be  in- 
quired in  what  way  the  sperm  whale  usually  does  supply 
his  enormous  frame  with  sufficient  food. 


FEEDING. 


35 


It  appears  from  all  I can  learn  among  the  oldest  and 
most  experienced  whalers,  and  from  the  observations  I 
have  been  enabled  to  make  myself  upon  this  interesting 
subject,  that  when  this  whale  is  inclined  to  feed,  he 
descends  a certain  depth  below  the  surface  of  the  ocean, 
and  there  remains  in  as  quiet  a state  as  possible,  opening 
his  narrow  elongated  mouth  until  the  lower  jaw  hangs 
down  perpendicularly,  or  at  right  angles  with  the  body. 

The  roof  of  his  mouth,  the  tongue,  and  especially  the 
teeth,  being  of  a bright  glistening  white  colour,  must  of 
course  present  a remarkable  appearance,  which  seems  to 
be  the  incitement  by  which  his  prey  are  attracted,  and 
when  a sufficient  number,  I am  strongly  led  to  suppose, 
are  within  the  mouth,  he  rapidly  closes  his  jaw  and 
swallows  the  contents  ; which  is  not  the  only  instance  of 
animals  obtaining  their  prey  by  such  means,  when  the 
form  of  their  bodies,  from  unwieldiness  or  some  other 
cause,  prevents  them  from  securing  their  prey  in  any 
other  manner,  or  by  the  common  method  of  the  chase. 
The  crocodile  frequently  employs  stratagems  of  the  like 
nature : covering  himself  in  mud,  and  lying  still  on  the 
bank  of  some  stream,  or  pond,  he  opens  his  enormous 
jaws,  when  hundreds  of  small  reptiles,  attracted  by  the 
mucus,  or  slime,  which  covers  their  interior,  become  the 
easy  prey  of  the  artful  machinations  of  their  scaly  deceiver. 
The  great  American  ant-eater  also  puts  into  action  a 
practice  which  is  very  similar,  for  thrusting  out  his  long 
tongue,  which  is  warm,  slimy,  and  steaming,  over  some 
ant-hill,  it  soon  becomes  covered  with  hundreds  of  those 
insects,  who  endeavour  to  make  a similar  property  of  the 
very  organ  by  which  they  are  entrapped.  When  covered, 


36 


HABITS  OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE: 


the  tongue  is  suddenly  drawn  into  the  mouth,  and  the 
many  little  animals  which  crowded  upon  it  are  disposed 
of  “in  one  fell  swoop.” 

That  the  mode  mentioned  above,  by  which  the  sperm 
whale  acquires  and  secures  its  prey,  is  correct,  I am  led 
to  believe  also,  from  the  following  considerations.  The 
sperm  whale  is  subject  to  several  diseases,  one  of  which 
is  a perfect,  or  imperfect,  loss  of  sight.  A whale  per- 
fectly blind,  was  taken  by  Captain  William  Swain,  of 
the  Sarah  and  Elizabeth  whaler  of  London,  both  eyes 
of  which  were  completely  disorganised,  the  orbits  being 
occupied  by  fungous  masses,  protruding  considerably, 
rendering  it  certain  that  the  whale  must  have  been 
deprived  of  vision  for  a long  space  of  time  ; yet,  not- 
withstanding this,  the  animal  was  quite  as  fat,  and  pro- 
duced as  much  oil,  as  any  other  captured  of  the  same 
size.  Besides  blindness,  this  whale  is  frequently  sub- 
ject to  deformity  of  the  lower  jaw  : two  instances  of 
which  I have  seen  myself,  in  which  the  deformity  was  so 
great  as  to  render  it  impossible  for  the  animal  to  find  the 
jaws  useful  in  catching  small  fish,  or  even,  one  might 
have  supposed,  in  deglutition  ; yet  these  whales  pos- 
sessed as  much  blubber  and  were  as  rich  in  oil  as  any  of 
a similar  size  I have  seen  before  or  since. 

In  both  these  instances  of  crooked  jaws,  the  nutrition 
of  the  animal  appeared  to  be  equally  perfect;  but  the 
deformities  were  different  in  one  case,  the  jaw  being  bent 
to  the  right  side  and  rolled  as  it  were  like  a scroll,  in 
the  other  it  was  bent  downwards,  but  also  curved  upon 
itself.  It  would  be  interesting  here  to  inquire  into  the 


FEEDING. 


37 


causes  of  this  deformity,  but  whether  it  is  the  effect  of 
disease,  or  the  consequence  of  accident,  I am  unable  to 
determine.  Old  whalers  affirm  that  it  is  caused  by 
fighting;  they  state  that  the  sperm  whale  fights  by 
rushing  head  first,  one  upon  the  other,  their  mouths  at 
the  same  time  wide  open,  their  object  appearing  to  be 
the  seizing  of  their  opponent  by  the  lower  jaw,  for  which 
purpose  they  frequently  turn  themselves  on  the  side  ; in 
this  manner  they  become  as  it  were  locked  together, 
their  jaws  crossing  each  other,  and  in  this  manner  they 
strive  vehemently  for  the  mastery.  I have  never  had 
the  good  fortune  to  witness  one  of  these  combats  ; but  if 
it  be  the  fact  that  such  take  place,  we  need  not  wonder 
at  seeing  so  many  deformed  jaws  in  this  kind  of  whale, 
for  we  can  easily  suppose  the  enormous  force  exerted  on 
these  occasions,  taking  into  consideration  at  the  same 
time  the  comparative  slenderness  of  the  jaw-bone  in  this 
animal.  Some  corroboration  of  the  above  statements 
arises  from  the  fact  as  far  as  my  knowledge  extends,  that 
the  female  is  never  seen  affected  with  this  deformity. 

From  these  facts  it  may  almost  be  deduced,  or  at 
least  surmised  with  a great  degree  of  probability,  that 
the  mode  of  procuring  food  as  above  stated,  as  that  pur- 
sued by  the  sperm  whale,  is  the  true  one,  for  without 
eyes,  and  with  a jaw  (his  only  instrument  of  prehension) 
so  much  deformed,  the  animal  would  seem  incapable  of 
pursuing  his  prey,  and  would  consequently  gain  but  a 
very  precarious  subsistence,  if  its  food  did  not  actually 
throng  about  the  mouth  and  throat,  invited  by  their  ap- 
pearance, and  attracted  also  in  some  degree  as  I suppose, 


38 


HABITS  OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE  : 


by  the  peculiar  and  very  strong  odour  of  the  sperm  whale. 
Besides,  it  is  well  known,  that  many  kinds  of  fish  are 
attracted  by  substances  possessing  a white  dazzling  ap- 
pearance, for  not  only  the  hungry  shark,  but  the  cautious 
and  active  dolphin  both  occasionally  fall  victims  to  this 
partiality,  as  I have  had  many  opportunities  of  observ- 
ing, When  the  Kent,  south-seaman,  was  fishing  on  the 
S(  off-shore  ground  ” of  Peru,  the  crew  caught  a great 
number  of  the  sepia  octopus,  or  squid  (the  peculiar  food 
of  the  sperm  whale),  in  one  night,  by  merely  lowering  a 
piece  of  polished  lead  armed  with  fish-hooks  a certain 
depth  into  the  sea ; the  sepias  gathered  around  it  in- 
stantly, so  that  by  giving  a slight  jerk  to  the  line,  the 
hooks  were  easily  driven  into  their  bodies. 

The  teeth  of  the  sperm  whale  are  merely  organs  of 
prehension,  they  can  be  of  no  use  for  mastication,  and 
consequently  the  fish,  etc.  which  he  occasionally  vomits, 
present  no  marks  of  having  undergone  that  process. 

The  manner  of  the  young  ones  sucking  is  a matter 
involved  in  some  obscurity.  It  is  impossible  from  the 
curious  conformation  of  the  mouth,  that  the  young  one 
could  seize  the  nipple  of  the  mother  with  the  fore-part 
of  it,  for  there  are  no  soft  lips  at  this  part,  but  instead,  the 
jaws  are  edged  with  a smooth  and  very  hard  cartilaginous 
substance,  but  about  two  feet  from  the  angle  of  the 
mouth,  they  begin  to  be  furnished  with  something  like 
lips,  which  form  at  the  angle  some  loose  folds,  soft  and 
elastic;  and  it  is  commonly  believed  by  the  most  expe- 
rienced whalers,  that  it  is  by  this  part  the  young  wdiale 
seizes  the  nipple  and  performs  the  act  of  sucking,  and 
which  is  doubtless  the  mode  of  its  doing  so. 


39 


CHAPTER  III. 


SWIMMING, 


Notwithstanding  his  enormous  size,  we  find  that  the 
sperm  whale  has  the  power  of  moving  through  the  water 
with  the  greatest  ease,  and  with  considerable  velo- 
city. When  undisturbed,  he  passes  tranquilly  along  just 
below  the  surface  of  the  water,  at  the  rate  of  about  three 
or  four  miles  an  hour,  which  progress  he  effects  by  a 
gentle  oblique  motion  from  side  to  side  of  the  u flukes,” 
precisely  in  the  same  manner  as  a boat  is  skulled  by 
means  of  an  oar  over  the  stern.  When  proceeding  at 
this  his  common  rate,  his  body  lies  horizontally,  his 
“ hump  ” projecting  above  the  surface  (see  cut,  p.  33, 
fig.  3),  with  the  water  a little  disturbed  around  it,  and 
more  or  less  according  to  his  velocity.  This  disturbed 
water  is  called  by  whalers  “ white  water/’  and  from  the 
greater  or  less  quantity  of  it,  an  experienced  whaler  can 
judge  very  accurately  of  the  rate  at  which  the  whale  is 
going,  from  a distance  even  of  four  or  five  miles. 

In  this  mode  of  swimming,  the  whale  is  able  to  attain 
a velocity  of  about  seven  miles  an  hour  ; but  when 
desirous  of  proceeding  at  a greater  rate,  the  action  of 
the  tail  is  materially  altered,— instead  of  being  moved 


40  HABITS  OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE  : 

laterally  and  obliquely,  it  strikes  the  water  with  the 
broad  flat  surface  of  the  flukes  in  a direct  manner, 
upwards  and  downwards,  and  each  time  the  blow  is 
made  with  the  inferior  surface,  the  head  of  the  whale 
sinks  down  to  the  depth  of  eight  or  ten  feet,  but  when 
the  blow  is  reversed,  it  rises  out  of  the  water,  presenting 
then  to  it  only  the  sharp  cutwater-like  inferior  portion. 

The  blow  with  the  upper  surface  of  the  flukes  appears 
to  be  by  far  the  most  powerful,  and  as  at  the  same  time 
the  resistance  of  the  broad  anterior  surface  of  the  head  is 
removed,  appears  to  be  the  principal  means  of  progression. 
This  mode  of  swimming,  with  the  head  alternately  in 
and  out  of  the  water,  is  called  by  whalers  64  going  head 
out/5  (see  cut,  p*  83,  fig.  1).  And  in  this  way  the 
whale  can  attain  a speed  of  ten  or  twelve  miles  an  hour, 
and  this  latter,  I believe  to  be  his  greatest  velocity. 

The  tail  is  thus  seen  to  be  the  great  means  of  pro- 
gression, and  the  fins  are  not  much  used  for  that  pur- 
pose ; but  occasionally  when  suddenly  disturbed,  the 
whale  has  the  power  of  sinking  quickly  and  directly 
downwards  in  the  horizontal  position,  which  he  effects 
by  striking  upwards  with  the  fins  and  taih 


CHAPTER  IV. 


BREATHING. 


All  the  cetacea,  as  is  well  known,  are  warm-blooded 
animals,  and  possess  lungs,  and  a corresponding  respi- 
ratory apparatus  resembling  those  of  terrestrial  animals, 
and  require  consequently  a frequent  intercourse  with 
atmospheric  air,  and  for  this  purpose  it  is  of  course 
necessary  that  they  should  rise  to  the  surface  of  the 
water  at  certain  intervals. 

The  majority  of  this  class  of  animals  do  not  appear 
to  perform  this  function  with  any  regularity,  and  it  is 
in  this  respect  that  the  sperm  whale  is  remarkably 
distinguished  among  his  congeners,  and  it  is  from  his 
peculiar  mode  of  “blowing”  that  he  is  recognised  even 
from  a great  distance  by  the  most  inexperienced  whaler. 
When  at  the  surface  for  the  purpose  of  respiration,  the 
whale  generally  remains  still,  but  occasionally  continues 
making  a gentle  progress  during  the  whole  of  his 
breathing  time.  If  the  water  is  moderately  smooth,  the 
first  part  of  the  whale  observable  is  a dark-coloured 
pyramidal  mass,  projecting  about  two  or  three  feet  out 
of  the  water,  which  is  the  “ hump.” 

At  very  regular  intervals  of  time,  the  nose,  or  snout, 
emerges  at  a distance  of  from  forty  to  fifty  feet  from  the 
hump,  in  the  full-grown  male.  From  the  extremity  of 


BREATHING. 


the  nose  the  spout  is  thrown  up,  which,  when  seen  from 
a distance,  appears  thick,  low,  and  bushy  (see  cut,  p.  33, 
fig,  3),  and  of  a white  colour  : it  is  formed  of  the  expired 
air,  which  is  forcibly  ejected  by  the  animal  through  the 
blow-hole,  acquiring  its  white  colour  from  minute  par- 
ticles of  water,  previously  lodged  in  the  chink,  or  fissure 
of  the  nostril,  and  also  from  the  condensation  of  the 
aqueous  vapour  thrown  off  by  the  lungs.  The  spout  is 
projected  from  the  blow-hole,  at  an  angle  of  135  degrees 
in  a slow  and  continuous  manner,  for  the  space  of 
about  three  seconds  of  time  ; — if  the  weather  is  fine  and 
clear,  and  there  is  a gentle  breeze  at  the  time,  it  may 
be  seen  from  the  mast-head  of  a moderate-sized  vessel, 
at  the  distance  of  four  or  five  miles.  The  spout  of 
the  sperm  whale  differs  much  from  that  of  other  large 
cetacea,  in  which  it  is  mostly  double,  and  projected 
thin,  and  like  a sudden  jet,  and  as  in  these  animals  the 
blow-holes  are  situated  nearly  on  the  top  of  the  head,  it 
is  thrown  up  to  a considerable  height,  in  almost  a per- 
pendicular direction.  When,  however,  a sperm  whale 
is  alarmed  or  “ gallied,’’  the  spout  is  thrown  up  much 
higher  and  with  great  rapidity,  and  consequently  differs 
much  from  its  usual  appearance.  The  regularity  with 
which  every  action  connected  with  its  breathing  is  per- 
formed by  the  sperm  whale,  is  very  remarkable.  The 
length  of  time  he  remains  at  the  surface,  the  number  of 
>pouts  or  expirations  made  at  one  time,  the  intervals 
between  the  spouts,  the  time  he  remains  invisible  in  the 
“ depths  of  the  ocean  buried,’’  are  all,  when  the  animal 
is  undisturbed,  as  regular  in  succession  and  duration  as 
it  is  possible  to  imagine. 


BREATHING* 


43 


In  different  individuals,  the  times  consumed  in  per- 
forming these  several  acts  vary,  but  in  each  they  are 
minutely  regular ; and  this  well-known  regularity  is  of 
considerable  use  to  the  fishers—for  when  a whaler  has 
once  noticed  the  periods  of  any  particular  sperm  whale, 
which  is  not  alarmed,  he  knows  to  a minute  when 
to  expect  it  again  at  the  surface,  and  how  long  it  will 
remain  there. 

Immediately  after  each  spout,  the  nose  sinks  beneath 
the  water,  scarcely  a second  intervening  for  the  act  of 
inspiration,  which  must  consequently  be  performed  very 
quickly,  the  air  rushing  into  the  chest  with  an  astonish- 
ing velocity  ; there  is  however  no  sound  caused  by  the 
inspiration,  and  very  little  by  the  expiration,  or  spout ; 
in  this  respect  also  differing  from  other  whales,  for  the 
“ finback  ” whale,  and  some  others,  have  their  inspira- 
tions accompanied  by  a loud  sound,  as  of  air  forcibly 
drawn  into  a small  orifice,— this  sound  is  called  by 
whalers,  the  “ drawback/’  and  when  heard  at  night  near 
the  ship,  convinces  the  listening  watch  of  the  species 
to  which  it  belongs.  In  a large  “ bull  ” sperm  whale, 
the  time  consumed  in  making  one  inspiration  and  one 
expiration,  or  the  space  from  the  termination  of  one 
spout  to  that  of  another,  is  ten  seconds ; during  six  of 
of  which,  the  nostril  is  beneath  the  surface  of  the  water, 
the  inspiration  occupying  one,  and  the  expiration  three 
seconds,  and  at  each  breathing  time  the  whale  makes 
from  sixty  to  seventy  expirations,  and  remains,  there- 
fore, at  the  surface  ten  or  eleven  minutes.  At  the 
termination  of  this  breathing  time,  or  as  whalers  say. 


44 


BREATHING. 


when  he  has  had  his  “ spoutings  out,”  the  head  sinks 
slowly,  the  “ small,”  or  the  part  between  the  “hump” 
and  “ flukes,”  appears  above  the  water,  curved,  with  the 
convexity  upwards,  the  flukes  are  then  lifted  high  into 
the  air,  and  the  animal,  having  assumed  a straight  posi- 
tion, descends  perpendicularly  to  an  unknown  depth,— 
this  act  is  performed  with  regularity  and  slowness,  and 
is  called  by  whalers,  “ peaking  the  flukes,”  an  act  too, 
which  is  always  noticed  by  those  who  are  employed  in 
the  look-out,  who  call  loudly,  when  they  disappear 
below  the  surface,  “ there  goes  flukes*” 

The  whale  continues  thus  hidden  beneath  the  surface 
for  an  hour  and  ten  minutes  ; some  will  remain  an  hour 
and  twenty  minutes,  and  others  for  only  one  hour,  but 
these  are  rare  exceptions.  If  we  then  take  into  con- 
sideration the  quantity  of  time  that  the  full-grown  sperm 
whale  consumes  in  respiration,  and  also  the  time  he 
takes  in  searching  for  food,  and  performing  other  acts, 
below  the  surface  of  the  ocean,  we  shall  find,  by  a 
trifling  calculation,  that  the  former  bears  proportion  to 
the  latter,  as  one  to  seven,  or  in  other  words,  that  a 
seventh  of  the  time  of  this  huge  animal  is  consumed  in 
the  function  of  respiration. 

The  females  being  found  generally  in  large  numbers 
and  in  close  company?  it  is  difficult  to  fix  the  attention 
upon  one  individual,  so  as  to  ascertain  precisely  the 
time  consumed  below  the  surface ; however,  as  all  in 
one  flock  generally  rise  at  the  same  time,  it  may  be 
observed,  that  they  remain  below  the  water  about 
twenty  minutes,  they  make  about  thirty-five  or  forty 


BREATHING, 


45 


expirations  during  the  period  they  are  at  the  surface, 
which  is  about  four  minutes,  and  they  thus  consume 
about  a fifth  of  their  time  in  respiration,  a proportion 
considerably  greater  than  that  of  the  adult  males. 

The  same  circumstances  of  accelerated  respiration  are 
observable  also  in  ct  young  bulls,”  and  the  acceleration 
seems  to  bear  a certain  definite  proportion  to  their 
respective  ages  and  size. 

When  disturbed  or  alarmed,  this  regularity  in  breath- 
ing appears  to  be  no  longer  observed  ; for  instance, 
when  a “ bull,”  which  when  undisturbed  remains  at  the 
surface  until  he  has  made  sixty  expirations,  is  alarmed 
by  the  approach  of  a boat,  he  immediately  plunges 
beneath  the  waves,  although  it  may  probably  have  per- 
formed half  its  usual  number,  but  will  soon  rise  again 
not  far  distant,  and  finish  his  full  number  of  respirations  ; 
and  in  this  case,  generally  also,  he  sinks  without  having 
assumed  the  perpendicular  position  before  described,  on 
the  contrary,  he  sinks  suddenly  in  the  horizontal  posi- 
tion, and  with  remarkable  rapidity,  leaving  a sort  of 
vortex,  or  whirlpool,  in  the  place  where  his  huge  body 
lately  floated, — this  curious  movement  is  effected,  as 
has  been  before  stated,  by  some  powerful  upward  strokes 
of  the  swimming  paws  and  flukes. 

When  urging  his  rapid  course  through  the  ocean,  in 
that  mode  of  swimming  which  is  called  “ going  head 
out,”  the  spout  is  thrown  up  every  time  the  head  is 
raised  above  the  surface,  and  under  these  circumstances 
of  violent  muscular  exertion,  as  would  be  expected, 
the  respiration  is  altogether  much  more  hurried  than 
usual. 


40 


CHAPTER  Y. 


OTHER  ACTIONS  OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


When  in  a state  of  alarm,  or  gambolling  in  sport  on 
the  surface  of  the  ocean,  the  sperm  whale  has  many 
curious  modes  of  acting ; with  the  reason  of  some,  I am 
at  present  unacquainted. 

It  is  difficult  to  conceive  any  object  in  nature  calcu- 
lated to  cause  alarm  to  this  leviathan;  he  appears  how- 
ever to  be  remarkably  timid,  and  is  readily  alarmed  by 
the  approach  of  a whale  boat. 

When  seriously  alarmed,  the  whale  is  said  by  sailors 
to  be  ffi  gallied,”  or  probably  more  properly,  galled,  and 
in  this  state  he  performs  many  actions  very  differently 
from  his  usual  mode,  as  has  been  mentioned  in  speaking 
of  his  swimming  and  breathing,  and  many  also  which 
he  is  never  observed  to  perform  under  any  other  cir- 
cumstances. One  of  them  is  what  is  called  “ sweeping/’ 
which  consists  in  moving  the  tail  slowly  from  side  to 
side  on  the  surface  of  the  water,  as  if  feeling  for  the 
boat  or  any  other  object  that  may  be  in  the  neighbour- 
hood. The  whale  has  also  an  extraordinary  manner  of 
rolling  over  and  over  on  the  surface,  and  this  he  does 
when  “ fastened  to,”  which  means,  when  a harpoon  with 
a line  attached  is  fixed  in  his  body ; and  in  this  case 


ACTIONS  OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE* 


47 


they  will  sometimes  coil  an  amazing  length  of  line  around 
them.  They  sometimes  also  place  themselves  in  a per- 
pendicular posture,  with  the  head  only  above  the  water, 
presenting  in  this  position  a most  extraordinary  appear- 
ance when  seen  from  a distance,  resembling  large  black 
rocks  in  the  midst  of  the  ocean  ; this  posture  they  seem 
to  assume  for  the  purpose  of  surveying  more  perfectly, 
or  more  easily,  the  surrounding  expanse.  A species  of 
whale  called  by  whalers  “ black  fish,”  is  most  frequently 
in  the  habit  of  assuming  this  position. 

The  eyes  of  the  sperm  whale  being  placed  in  the 
widest  part  of  the  head,  of  course  afford  the  animal  an 
extensive  field  of  vision,  and  he  appears  to  view  objects 
very  readily  that  are  placed  laterally  in  a direct  line 
with  the  eye,  and  when  they  are  placed  at  some  dis- 
tance before  him.  His  common  manner  of  looking  at  a 
boat  or  ship  is  to  turn  over  on  his  side,  so  as  to  cause 
the  rays  from  the  object  to  strike  directly  upon  the 
retina. 

Now  when  alarmed,  and  consequently  anxious  to  take 
as  rapid  a glance  as  possible  on  all  sides,  he  can  much 
more  readily  do  so  when  in  the  above-described  perpen- 
dicular posture,  and  this  consequently  appears  to  be  the 
reason  of  his  assuming  it. 

Occasionally,  when  lying  at  the  surface,  the  whale 
appears  to  amuse  itself  by  violently  beating  the  water 
with  its  tail ; this  act  is  called  “ lob-tailing,”  and  the 
water  lashed  in  this  way  into  foam,  is  termed  “ white 
water  ” by  the  whaler,  and  by  it  the  whale  is  recognised 
from  a great  distance. 


48 


ACTIONS  OF 


But  one  of  the  most  curious  and  surprising  of  the 
actions  of  the  sperm  whale,  is  that  of  leaping  completely 
out  of  the  water,  or  of  “ breaching,”  as  it  is  called  by 
whalers  (see  cut,  p.  33,  fig.  2).  The  way  in  which  he 
performs  this  extraordinary  motion,  appears  to  be  by 
descending  to  a certain  depth  below  the  surface,  and  then 
making  some  powerful  strokes  with  his  tail,  which  are 
frequently  and  rapidly  repeated,  and  thus  convey  a great 
degree  of  velocity  to  his  body  before  it  reaches  the  sur- 
face, when  he  darts  completely  out.  When  just  emerged 
and  at  its  greatest  elevation,  his  body  forms  with  the 
surface  of  the  water  an  angle  of  about  45  degrees,  the 
flukes  lying  parallel  with  the  surface ; in  falling,  the 
animal  rolls  his  body  slightly,  so  that  he  always  falls 
on  his  side:  he  seldom  breaches  more  than  twice  or 
thrice  at  a time,  or  in  quick  succession.  The  breach 
of  a whale  may  be  seen  from  the  mast-head  on  a clear 
day  at  the  distance  of  six  miles. 

It  is  probable  that  the  sperm  whale  often  resorts  to 
this  action  of  breaching  for  the  purpose  of  ridding 
itself  of  various  animals  which  infest  its  skin,  such  as 
large  “ sucking  fish,”  and  other  animals  which  resemble 
small  crabs.  Of  the  former  of  these  parasites,  some 
fix  themselves  so  closely  to  their  convenient  carrier, 
that  they  sometimes  adhere  to  the  skin  of  the  whale 
for  several  hours  after  its  death,  and  then  suffer  them- 
selves to  be  forced  off  by  the  hands  of  the  whaler.  It 
is  not  improbable  also,  that  some  of  these  actions  may 
be  resorted  to  in  the  whale  endeavouring  to  avoid  the 
assaults  of  the  sword-fish,  by  which  they  are  not  un- 


THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


49 


frequently  attacked,  and  this  is  supported  by  the  fact  of 
a portion  of  the  sword  of  one  of  these  animals  having 
been  found  imbedded  in  the  side  of  a whale  stranded  on 
the  coast  of  Yorkshire,  and  which  was  probably  broken 
off  by  the  violent  struggles  between  them. 

There  is  also  an  animal  called  a “ thresher,55  which  is 
described  by  whalers,  but  which  I have  never  seen, 
although  I have  observed  hundreds  of  sword-fish  while 
off  the  coast  of  Peru,  and  also  in  other  parts  of  the  world. 

It  is  said  by  whalers,  that  the  “thresher55  and  the 
sword-fish  attack  the  whale  in  conjunction,  the  latter  of 
which  goad  him  from  below,  while  the  first  leaps  out  of 
the  water,  and  falls  upon  him  from  above-— the  attack 
thus  intimidating  the  whale,  and  giving  an  opportunity 
to  the  sword-fish  to  inflict  his  wounds ; but  for  what 
purpose  I am  at  a loss  to  conjecture,  for  I am  not  aware 
that  the  latter  has  any  power  of  devouring  the  whale 
after  his  death,  were  he  even  able  to  cause  it.  Never 
theless,  a gentleman  in  whose  veracity  I have  great  confix 
dence,  informed  me  that  he  once  witnessed  an  attack  of 
this  kind,  which  took  place  while  he  was  sailing  along 
the  coast  of  Peru. 

He  stated,  that  he  had  been  observing  a sperm  whale 
during  the  time  it  had  remained  at  the  surface  to  breathe, 
which  after  it  had  performed  went  through  the  evolution  of 
“peaking55  its  flukes  in  the  usual  manner  and  disappeared. 
As  it  was  a large  whale,  and  as  he  knew  it  was  likely  to 
remain  under  water  for  a considerable  time,  he  scarcely 
expected  to  see  it  again.  However,  in  this  he  was 
mistaken ; for  after  it  had  disappeared  only  for  a few 

D 


50 


ACTIONS  OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


minutes  it  again  rose,  apparently  in  great  trepidation, 
and  as  it  reared  with  great  velocity,  half  of  its  huge 
body  projected  out  of  the  water.  Gaining,  however, 
in  a few  seconds  the  horizontal  position,  it  went  off  at 
its  utmost  speed,  “ going  head  out,?— the  moment  after 
which  he  saw  a fish,  somewhat  resembling  a conger-eel 
in  figure  but  rather  more  bulky,  and  to  all  appearance 
about  six  or  eight  feet  in  length,  ding  itself  high  out  of 
the  water  after  the  whale,  and  fall  clumsily  on  its  back, 
which  caused  still  more  alarm  to  the  immense  but  timid 
animal,  so  that  it  beat  the  water  with  its  tail,  and  reared 
its  enormous  head  so  violently,  that  sounds  from  the 
former  could  be  heard  at  a great  distance : it  still  how- 
ever continued  its  rapid  career,  receiving  every  few 
minutes  the  unwelcome  visits  of  its  galling  adversary. 
My  informant  also  stated,  that  he  had  good  reason  to 
believe  that  some  other  animal  was  at  the  same  time 
attacking  it  from  below ; for  he,  on  more  than  one  occa- 
sion, saw  some  animal  dart  at  times  to  the  surface  with 
amazing  quickness,  as  if  engaged  with  great  fury  in  the 
contest;  and  which,  he  supposed,  prevented  the  whale 
from  descending,  in  which  he  had  the  power  no  doubt,  if 
he  had  not  been  thus  prevented,  of  leaving  his  antago- 
nists far  behind.  The  attack  was  continued  for  a con- 
siderable time,  during  which  the  whale  had  got  a great 
distance  from  the  ship,  when  it  twice  threw  itself  com- 
pletely out  of  its  native  element,  no  doubt  endeavouring 
to  escape  from  its  tormenting  adversaries  by  this  act 
of  “ breaching,”  and  which  I have  myself  seen  him  do, 
after  having  been  unsuccessfully  chased  by  the  boats. 


51 


CHAPTER  VI. 

HERDING,  AND  OTHER  PARTICULARS,  OF  THE 

SPERM  WHALE. 


The  sperm  whale  is  a gregarious  animal,  and  the  herds 
formed  by  it  are  of  two  kinds— the  one  consisting  of 
females,  the  other  of  young  males  not  fully  grown. 

These  herds  are  called  by  whalers  <s  schools/*  and 
occasionally  consist  of  great  numbers : I have  seen  in  one 
school  as  many  as  five  or  six  hundred.  With  each  herd 
or  school  of  females  are  always  from  one  to  three  large 
“ bulls  the  lords  of  the  herd,  or  as  they  are  called, 
the  “ schoolmasters.”  The  males  are  said  to  be  extremely 
jealous  of  intrusion  by  strangers,  and  to  fight  fiercely  to 
maintain  their  rights.  The  full-grown  males,  or  “ large 
whales,”  almost  always  go  alone  in  search  of  food ; and 
when  they  are  seen  in  company  they  are  supposed  to  be 
making  passages,  or  migrating  from  one  “ feeding  ground” 
to  another.  The  large  whale  is  generally  very  incau- 
tious, and  if  alone  he  is  without  difficulty  attacked,  and 
by  expert  whalers  generally  very  easily  killed ; as  he  fre- 
quently, after  receiving  the  first  blow  or  plunge  of  the 
harpoon,  appears  hardly  to  feel  it,  but  continues  lying 
like  a ‘ ‘ log  of  wood  ” in  the  water,  before  he  rallies  or 
makes  any  attempt  to  escape  from  his  enemies. 

“ Large  whales”  are  however  sometimes,  but  rarely, 


52 


HERDING  OF  THE 


met  with  remarkably  cunning  and  full  of  courage,  wbeu 
they  will  commit  dreadful  havoc  with  their  jaws  and 
tail ; the  jaw  and  head  however  appear  to  be  their  prin- 
cipal offensive  weapons. 

The  female  breeds  at  all  seasons,  producing  but  one 
at  a time,  except  in  a few  instances,  in  which  two  are 
produced,  as  the  case  of  the  one  stranded  on  the  coast 
of  D’Audierne  fully  proves : her  time  of  gestation  is 
unknown  ; F.  Cuvier  supposes  it  to  be  about  ten  months. 
Their  young,  when  first  born,  are,  according  to  Mr. 
Bennett,  about  fourteen  feet  in  length  and  six  feet  in 
girth— he  also  states  that  they  lie  in  the  uterus  in  the 
form  of  a bow.  M.  F.  Cuvier  states  that  those  which 
were  brought  forth  at  D’Audierne  were  ten  or  eleven  feet 
in  length ; while  Captain  Colnett  observes,  that  the 
young  sperm  whales,  which  he  saw  in  great  numbers  off 

m 

the  Galapago’s  Islands,  were  not  larger  than  a “ small 
porpoise. ^ Of  these  authorities  I am  inclined  to  depend 
most  upon  the  accounts  given  by  Mr.  Bennett,  because 
they  coincide  with  instances  which  have  come  under  my 
own  observation. 

The  female  is  much  smaller  than  the  male ; her  size, 
when  generally  considered,  being  not  more  than  one- 
fifth  that  of  the  adult  “ large  whale.  The  females 

* This  fact  has  been  much  doubted  by  Sir  William  Jardine,  on 
whales,  in  vol.  iii.  of  the  “ Naturalist’s  Library,”  p.  167,  where,  in 
using  the  information  contained  in  the  first  edition  of  this  work, 
he  states,  “ according  to  Beale  she  is  much  smaller  than  the  male, 
in  the  proportion  of  nearly  one  to  four  or  five.  This  appears  a 
novel  and,  we  presume  to  think,  a somewhat  doubtful  assertion;” 
yet  I can  still  assure  Sir  William  that  it  is  not  far  from  the  truth  ! 


SPERM  WHALE. 


53 


are  very  remarkable  for  attachment  to  their  young, 
which  they  may  be  frequently  seen  urging  and  assisting 
to  escape  from  danger  with  the  most  unceasing  care  and 
fondness.  They  are  also  not  less  remarkable  for  their 
strong  feeling  of  sociality  or  attachment  to  one  another ; 
and  this  is  carried  to  so  great  an  extent,  as  that  one 
female  of  a herd  being  attacked  and  wounded,  her 
faithful  companions  will  remain  around  her  to  the  last 
moment,  or  until  they  are  wounded  themselves.  This 
act  of  remaining  by  a wounded  companion  is  called  by 
whalers  “ heaving-to,*5  and  whole  “ schools  ” have  been 
destroyed  by  dexterous  management,  when  several  ships 
have  been  in  company,  wholly  from  these  whales  possess- 
ing this  remarkable  disposition.  The  attachment  appears 
to  be  reciprocal  on  the  part  of  the  young  whales,  which 
have  been  seen  about  the  ship  for  hours  after  their  parents 
have  been  killed. 

The  young  males,  or  u young  bulls/*  go  in  large 
schools,  but  differ  remarkably  from  the  females  in  dispo- 
sition inasmuch  as  they  make  an  immediate  and  rapid 
retreat  upon  one  of  their  number  being  struck,  who  is 
left  to  take  the  best  care  he  can  of  himself.  I never  but 
once  saw  them  6<  heave-to/’  and  in  that  case  it  was  only 
for  a short  time,  and  which  seemed  rather  to  arise  from 
their  confusion  than  affection  for  their  wounded  compa- 
nion. They  are  also  very  cunning  and  cautious,  keeping 
at  all  times  a good  look-out  for  danger ; it  is  consequently 
necessary  for  the  whaler  to  be  extremely  cautious  in  his 
mode  of  approaching  them,  so  as,  if  possible,  to  escape 
being  heard  or  seen,  for  they  have  some  mode  of  com- 


54 


HERDING  OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


munication  one  to  another,  through  a whole  school,  in 
an  incredibly  short  space  of  time. 

6 4 Young  bulls”  are  consequently  much  more  trouble- 
some to  attack,  and  more  difficult  and  dangerous  to  kill, 
great  dexterity  and  despatch  being  necessary  to  give 
them  no  time  to  recover  from  the  pain  and  fright  caused 
by  the  first  blow.  When  about  three-fourths  grown,  or 
sometimes  only  half,  they  separate  from  each  other,  and 
go  singly  in  search  of  food. 

All  sperm  whales,  both  large  and  small,  have  some 
method  of  communicating  by  signals  to  each  other,  by 
which  they  become  apprised  of  the  approach  of  danger, 
and  this  they  do,  although  the  distance  may  be  very 
considerable  between  them,  sometimes  amounting  to 
four,  five,  or  even  seven  miles.  The  mode  by  which 
this  is  effected,  remains  a curious  secret. 


55 


CHAPTER  VII. 


NATURE  OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE’S  FOOD. 


It  has  been  stated  before  (see  Chapter  ii.)  that  the  food 
of  the  sperm  whale  consists  almost  wholly  of  an  animal 
of  the  cuttle-fish  kind,  called  by  whalers  “ squid,”  and 
by  naturalists,  “ sepia  octopus,”  and  at  times,  when  he  is 
near,  the  shore,  as  in  Volcano  Ray,  or  in  the  straits  of 
Corea,  it  also  consists  of  small  fish  which  are  denomi- 
nated “rock  cod”  by  sailors,  and  which  sometimes, 
however,  approach  the  size  of  a moderate  salmon. 

But  the  instances  in  which  fish  of  this  description 
have  been  ejected  from  the  stomach  of  the  sperm  whale 
are  but  rare,  while  every  day’s  experience  proves  that 
its  common  food  consists  of  that  division  of  molluscous 
animals  which  naturalists  have  denominated  cephalo- 
poda, and  of  which  the  “ sepia  octopus,”  or  “ sea  squid,' 
appears  to  be  the  most  common. 

A few  words  on  the  natural  history  of  this  highly 
organized  and  remarkable  animal,  cannot  fail  to  be 
interesting  to  the  reader,  as  it  has  excited  the  attention 
of  the  naturalist  for  many  ages,  from  the  remarkable 
nature  of  its  formation  and  very  peculiar  habits. 

Endowed  with  hearing,  seeing,  touch,  smell,  and 
taste,  it  is  second  to  no  inhabitant  of  the  waters  in  the 


56 


NATURE  OF  THE 


complex  elaboration  of  its  organs,  which  has  constantly 
rendered  it  a great  object  of  attention  to  the  anatomist 
and  physiologist. 

Dr.  Roget,  in  his  Bridgewater  Treatise  under  the  head 
of  Cephalopoda,  states  “ that  we  now  arrive  at  a highly 
interesting  family  of  mollusca,  denominated  cephalopoda, 
and  distinguished  above  all  the  preceding  orders,  by 
being  endowed  with  a much  more  elaborate  organiza- 
tion,  and  a far  wider  range  of  faculties.  The  cephalo- 
poda have  been  so  named  from  the  position  of  certain 
organs  of  progressive  motion  which  are  situated  on  the 
head,  and  like  the  tentacula  of  the  polypus,  surround 
the  opening  of  the  mouth.  These  feet  or  arms,  or  ten- 
tacula,  if  we  choose  to  call  them  so,  are  long,  slender, 
and  flexible  processes,  exceedingly  irritable  and  con- 
tractile in  every  part,  and  provided  with  numerous 
muscles,  which  are  capable  of  moving  and  twisting  them 
in  all  directions  with  extraordinary  quickness  and  pre- 
cision; they  are  thus  capable  of  being  employed  as 
instruments  not  only  of  progressive  motion,  but  also  of 
prehension.  For  this  latter  purpose  they  are  in  many 
species  peculiarly  well  adapted,  because,  being  perfectly 
flexible  as  well  as  highly  muscular,  they  twine  with  ease 
round  an  object  of  any  shape,  and  grasp  it  with  prodi- 
gious force.  In  addition  to  these  properties,  they  derive 
a remarkable  power  of  adhesion  to  the  surfaces  of  bodies 
from  their  being  furnished  with  numerous  suckers  all 
along  their  inner  sides.  Each  of  these  suckers  is  usually 
supported  on  a narrow  neck  or  pedicle,  and  strengthened 
at  its  circumference  by  a ring  of  cartilage.  Their  internal 


SPERM  WHALE’S  FOOD. 


57 


mechanism  is  more  artificial  than  the  simple  construc- 
tion already  described,  for  when  the  surface  of  the  disk 
is  fully  expanded,  we  find  that  it  is  formed  of  a great 
number  of  small  slender  pieces,  resembling  teeth,  closely 
set  together,  and  extending  from  the  inner  margin  of  the 
cartilaginous  rings  in  the  form  of  converging  radii,  to 
within  a short  distance  of  the  centre,  where  they  leave 
a circular  aperture. 

“ In  the  flattened  state  of  the  sucker,  this  aperture  is 
filled  by  the  projecting  part  of  a softer  substance,  which 
forms  an  interior  portion  capable  of  being  detached  from 
the  flat  circle  of  the  teeth  when  the  sucker  is  in  action, 
and  of  leaving  an  intervening  cavity.  It  is  evident 
that  by  this  mechanism,  which  combines  the  properties 
of  an  accurate  valve  with  an  extensive  cavity  for  pro- 
ducing rarefaction  or  the  tendency  to  vacuum,  the  power 
of  adhesion  is  considerably  augmented.  So  great  is  the 
force  with  which  the  tentacula  of  the  cuttle-fish  adhere 
to  bodies  by  means  of  this  apparatus,  that  while  their 
muscular  fibres  continue  contracted,  it  is  easier  to  tear 
away  the  substance  of  the  limb  than  to  release  it  from 
its  attachment.  Even  in  the  dead  animal,  I have  found 
that  the  suckers  retain  considerable  power  of  adhesion 
to  any  smooth  surface  to  which  they  may  be  applied. 

“ The  octopus , which  was  the  animal  denominated 
polypus  by  Aristotle,  has  eight  arms  of  equal  length, 
and  contains  in  its  interior  two  very  small  rudimentary 
shells,  formed  by  the  inner  surface  of  the  mantle.  This 
shell  becomes  much  more  distinct  in  the  loligo,  where  it 
is  cartilaginous,  and  shaped  like  the  blade  of  a sword. 

d 2 


58 


NATURE  OF  THE 


The  internal  shell  of  the  common  sepia  is  large  and 
broad,  and  composed  wholly  of  the  carbonate  of  lime,  it 
is  well  known  by  the  name  of  cuttle-fish  bone.  Its 
structure  is  extremely  curious,  and  deserves  particular 
attention,  as  establishing  the  universality  of  the  prin- 
ciple which  regulates  the  formation  of  shells,  whether 
external  or  internal,  and  from  which  structures  differing 
much  in  their  outward  appearance  may  result.  It  is 
composed  of  an  immense  number  of  thin  calcareous 
plates,  arranged  parallel  to  one  another,  and  connected 
by  thousands  of  minute  hollow  pillars  of  the  same  cal- 
careous material,  passing  perpendicularly  between  the 
adjacent  surfaces.  This  shell  is  not  adherent  to  any 
internal  part  of  the  animal  which  has  produced  it,  but 
is  enclosed  in  a capsule,  and  appears  like  a foreign  body 
impacted  in  the  midst  of  organs  with  which  at  first 
sight  it  appears  to  have  no  relation.  It  no  doubt  is  of 
use  in  giving  mechanical  support  to  the  soft  substance 
of  the  body,  and  especially  to  the  surrounding  muscular 
flesh,  and  thus  probably  contributes  to  the  high  energy 
which  the  animal  displays  in  all  its  movements.  It  has 
been  regarded  as  an  internal  skeleton,  but  it  certainly 
has  no  pretensions  to  such  a designation,  for,  although 
enveloped  by  the  mantle,  it  is  still  formed  by  that 
organ,  and  the  material  of  which  it  is  composed,  still 
carbonate  of  lime.  On  both  these  accounts  it  must  be 
considered  as  a true  shell,  and  classed  among  the  pro- 
ductions of  the  integuments.  It  differs  indeed  altogether 
from  bony  structures,  which  are  composed  of  a different 
kind  of  material,  and  formed  on  principles  of  growth 


SPERM  WHALE’S  FOOD. 


59 


totally  dissimilar.  Besides  tentacula,  the  sepia  is  also 
provided  with  a pair  of  fleshy  fins  extending  along  the 
two  sides  of  the  body.  The  loligo  has  similar  organs  of 
a smaller  size,  and  situated  only  at  the  extremity  of  the 
body  which  is  opposite  to  the  head.  They  have  been 
regarded  as  the  rudiments  of  true  fins,  which  are  organs 
developed  in  fishes,  and  which  are  supported  by  slender 
bones  called  rays,  but  no  structure  of  this  kind  exists 
in  the  fins  of  the  cephalopoda.  In  swimming,  the 
organs  principally  employed  by  cuttle-fish  for  giving  an 
effective  impulse  to  the  water  are  the  tentacula.  These 
they  employ  as  oars,  striking  with  them  from  behind 
forwards,  so  that  their  effort  is  to  propel  the  hinder 
part  of  the  body,  which  is  thus  made  to  advance 
foremost,  the  head  following  in  the  rear.  They  also 
use  these  organs  as  feet  for  moving  along  the  bottom  of 
the  sea.  In  their  progress  under  these  circumstances, 
the  head  is  always  turned  downwards,  and  the  body  up- 
wards, so  that  the  animal  may  be  considered  as  literally 
walking  on  its  head ! 

“ The  necessity  of  this  position  for  the  feet  arises 
probably  from  the  close  investment  of  the  mantle  over 
the  body ; for  although  the  mantle  leaves  an  aperture  in 
the  neck  for  the  entrance  of  water  to  the  respiratory 
organs,  yet  in  other  respects  it  forms  a sack,  closed  in 
every  part,  except  where  the  head,  neck,  and  accom- 
panying tentacula  protrude. 

“ In  the  calamary,  as  well  as  in  the  common  sepia, 
two  of  the  arms  are  much  longer  than  the  rest,  and 
terminate  in  a thick  cylindrical  portion,  covered  with 


60 


NATURE  OF  THE 


numerous  suckers,  which  may  not  unaptly  be  compared 
to  a hand* 

“ These  processes  are  employed  by  cuttle-fish  as 
anchors,  for  the  purpose  of  fixing  themselves  firmly  to 
rocks  during  violent  agitations  of  the  sea;  and  accord- 
ingly we  find,  that  it  is  only  the  extremities  of  these  long 
tentacula  that  are  provided  with  suckers,  while  the  short 
ones  have  them  also  along  their  whole  length.  The  other 
genera  of  cephalopodous  mollusca  are  like  the  sepia,  pro- 
vided with  tentacula  attached  to  the  head.  They  compre- 
hend animals  differing  exceedingly  in  size,  some  being 
very  large,  but  a great  number  very  minute  and  even 
microscopic. — See  M.  D’Orbigny,  in  the  f Annaies  des 
Sciences  Naturelles,’  vii.  96. 

“ Other  animals  of  this  kind  inhabit  shells,  one  of 
■which  is  the  argonaut,  or  paper-nautilus,  which  possesses 
a shell,  says  Roget,  “ exceedingly  thin,  and  almost  pel- 
lucid, probably  for  the  sake  of  lightness,  for  it  is  intended 
to  be  used  as  a boat.  For  the  purpose  of  enabling  the 
animal  to  avail  itself  of  the  impulses  of  the  air  while 
it  is  thus  floating  on  the  water,  nature  has  furnished  it 
with  a thin  membrane,  which  she  has  attached  to  two  of 
the  tentacula,  so  that  it  can  be  spread  out  like  a sail,  to 
catch  the  light  winds  which  waft  the  animal  forward  on 
its  course.  While  its  diminutive  bark  is  thus  scudding 
over  the  surface  of  the  deep,  the  assiduous  navigator 
does  not  neglect  to  apply  its  tentacula  as  oars  on  either 
side,  to  direct  as  well  as  to  accelerate  its  motion.  No 
sooner  does  the  breeze  freshen,  and  the  sea  become 
ruffled,  than  the  animal  hastens  to  take  down  its  sail, 


SPERM  WHALE’S  FOOD* 


61 


and  quickly  withdrawing  its  tentacula  within  its  shell, 
renders  itself  specifically  heavier  than  the  water,  and 
sinks  immediately  into  more  tranquil  regions  beneath 
the  surface.” 

Sir  William  Jardine  on  whales,  in  the  6 Naturalist’s 
Library,’  vol.  vi.  p.  162,  regarding  the  food  of  the 
spermaceti  whale,  “ ventures  to  suggest  to  those  who 
may  have  frequent  opportunities  of  observing,  whether 
this  whale  may  not  also  frequently  resort  to  the  medusse 
and  minute  fish,  which  in  so  remarkable  a manner  sup- 
ply food  to  some  of  the  smaller  as  well  as  the  other 
genera  of  the  gigantic  whales.  That  there  is  an  abun- 
dant supply  of  this  sustenance,  both  in  the  antarctic 
ocean,  and  the  more  smiling  latitudes  of  the  southern 
seas,  can  easily  be  proved  by  a reference  to  6 Lesson’s 
Statements,’  and  also  to  those  of  Captain  Colnett,  who, 
when  near  the  southern  point  of  America  observes, 4 during 
this  forenoon  we  passed  several  fields  of  spawn,  which 
caused  the  water  to  bear  the  appearance  of  barley  cover- 
ing the  surface  of  a bank.’  ” Orbigny  also  remarks,  that 
there  are  immense  tracts  off  the  coast  of  Brazil,  filled 
with  small  creatures  so  numerous  as  to  impart  a red 
colour  to  the  sea ; large  portions  are  thus  highly  coloured, 
and  receive  from  the  whalers  the  name  of  Banc  du 
Bresil.  He  also  states  that  another  similar  bank  occurs 
near  Cape  Horn,  in  57°  south  latitude.  “ Statements 
of  this  sort,”  observes  Sir  William,  4<  could  easily  be 
multiplied,  and  hence  we  cannot  but  suppose  that  this 
kind  of  food,  which  is  ascertained  to  afford  such  rich 
nourishment  to  the  other  great  cetacea,  may,  very  pos - 


82 


NATURE  OF  THE 


sibly  be  appropriated  by  the  sperm  whale  to  the  same 
purpose.” 

This  is  an  unaccountable  error  on  the  part  of  the 
compiler  of  the  Naturalist’s  Library.  The  apparent 
banks  above  mentioned,  and  which  I have  myself  fre- 
quently seen  in  various  parts  of  the  ocean,  are  certainly 
formed  by  myriads  of  medusae,  and  other  small  animals 
which  form  the  sustenance  of  the  balaena  mysticetus’  or 
Greenland  whale’s  food;  which  consists  of  animals  of  the 
shrimp  tribe,  and  other  minute  creatures  which  are  closely 
congregated,  and  swarm  in  those  animated  “ banks,”  but 
of  which  the  sperm  whale  never  partakes,  as  it  is  not 
s<  very  possible,”  but  quite  impossible  that  he  could  do 
so,  however  inclined  he  might  be,  on  account  of  the 
organization  of  his  feeding  apparatus,  which  may  be 
readily  seen  when  its  form  is  referred  to. 

By  what  means  could  the  sperm  whale  separate  the 
minute  animals  which  he  might  enclose  within  his  jaws 
from  the  sea  water  in  which  they  are  contained  ? If  the 
sperm  whale  had  the  means  of  doing  so,  of  what  use  is 
the  baleen  plates  or  screens  to  the  balsenae,  or  black 
whales,  which  are  known  to  feed  in  the  banks  before 
adverted  to? 

The  sepia  octopus,  or  “ sea  squid,”  as  it  is  termed 
by  whalers,  sometimes  reaches  an  enormous  size.  Mr. 
Henry  Baker,  f.r.s.,  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions 
for  1758,  p.  777,  after  having  given  an  interesting  de- 
scription of  a specimen,  sent  to  him  for  examination  by 
the  Earl  of  Macclesfield,  states  that  “ it  can,  by  spread- 
ing its  arms  abroad  like  a net,  so  fetter  and  entangle  the 


SPERM  WHALE’S  FOOD. 


63 


prey  they  enclose  when  they  are  drawn  together,  as  to 
render  it  incapable  of  exerting  its  strength  ; for,  however 
feeble  these  branches  or  arms  may  be  singly,  their  power 
united  becomes  surprising ; and,  we  are  assured,  nature 
is  so  kind  to  these  animals,  that  if  in  their  struggles  any 
of  their  arms  are  broken  off,  after  some  time  they  will 
grow  again,  of  which  a specimen  at  the  British  Museum 
is  an  undoubted  proof,  for  a little  new  arm  is  there  seen 
sprouting  forth  in  the  room  of  a large  one  which  had 
been  lost.  “It  is  evident,”  he  continues,  “from  what 
has  been  said,  that  the  sea  polypus,  or  octopus,  must 
be  terrible  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  waters  in  proportion 
to  its  size  (and  Pliny  mentions  one  whose  arms  were 
thirty  feet  in  length),  for  the  close  embraces  of  its  arms 
and  adhesion  of  its  suckers  must  render  the  efforts  of  its 
prey  ineffectual,  either  for  resistance  or  escape,  unless  it 
be  endued  with  an  extraordinary  degree  of  strength.” 

Of  the  smaller  genera  of  these  animals  the  reader  will 
find  some  interesting  details,  by  referring  to  the  appen- 
dix  to  Tuckey’s  Voyage  to  the  Congo,  vol.  iii.  There  is 
also  an  account  of  a newly-discovered  Cephalopod  in  the 
appendix  to  Sir  J.  Boss’  Voyage  to  the  Antarctic  Regions. 

A gigantic  cephalopod  was  discovered  by  Drs.  Bank 
and  Solander,  in  Captain  Cook’s  first  voyage,  floating 
dead  upon  the  sea,  surrounded  by  birds,  who  were  feed- 
ing on  its  remains.  From  the  parts  of  this  specimen 
which  are  still  preserved  in  the  Hunterian  Collection,  and 
which  have  always  strongly  excited  the  attention  of 
naturalists,  it  must  have  measured  at  least  six  feet  from 
the  end  of  the  tail  to  the  end  of  the  tentacles. 


64 


NATURE  OF  THE 


But  this  last  we  must  imagine  a mere  pigmy,  when  we 
consider  the  enormous  dimensions  of  the  one  spoken  of 
by  Dr.  Schewediawer,  in  the  Phil.  Trans,  vol.  Ixxiii. 
p.  226,  whose  tentaculum  or  limb  measured  twenty- 
seven  feet  in  length  ; but  let  the  Doctor  speak  for  himself. 
“ One  of  the  gentlemen,”  says  he,  **  who  was  so  kind  as 
to  communicate  to  me  his  observations  on  this  subject 
(ambergris)  also,  ten  years  ago,  hooked  a spermaceti  whale 
that  had  in  its  mouth  a tentaculum  of  the  sepia  octo- 
podia  nearly  twenty-seven  feet  long  ! This  did  not  appear 
its  whole  length,  for  one  end  was  corroded  by  digestion, 
so  that,  in  its  natural  state,  it  may  have  been  a great 
deal  longer.  When  we  consider/’  says  the  Doctor,  **  the 
enormous  bulk  of  the  tentaculum  here  spoken  of,  we 
shall  cease  to  wonder  at  the  common  saying  of  the 
fishermen,  that  the  cuttle-fish  is  the  largest  fish  of  the 
ocean.” 

In  Todd’s  Cyclopaedia  of  Anatomy,  p.  529,  treating 
of  cephalopoda,  in  an  admirable  paper  by  Mr.  Owen,  it 
states,  that  **  the  natives  of  the  Polynesian  Islands,  who 
dive  for  shell-fish,  have  a well-founded  dread  and  abhor- 
rence of  these  formidable  cephalopods,  and  one  cannot 
feel  surprised  that  their  fears  should  have  perhaps  exag- 
gerated their  dimensions  and  destructive  attributes.” 

The  same  learned  writer,  after  having  beautifully 
described  another  animal  of  this  order,  observes—**  Let 
the  reader  picture  to  himself  the  projecting  margin  of  the 
horny  hook  developed  into  a long-curved,  sharp-pointed 
claw,  and  these  weapons  clustered  at  the  expanded  ter- 
minations of  the  tentacles  and  arranged  in  a double. 


SPERM  WHALE?S  FOOD. 


65 


alternate  series,  along  the  whole  internal  surface  of  the 
eight  muscular  feet,  and  he  will  have  some  idea  of  the 
formidable  nature  of  the  carnivorous  onychoteuthis.” 

This  species  of  cephalopod  is  thus  armed  with  those 
kind  of  teeth  at  the  termination  of  the  tentacles,  in  order 
to  secure  the  “ agile,  slippery,  and  mucous-clad  fishes’5 
on  which  it  preys.  And  there  is  an  instance  recorded  in 
Sir  Grenville  Temple’s  Excursions  in  the  Mediterranean 
by  which  we  perceive  that  these  terrible  creatures  some- 
times prey  upon  men  ! “ In  those  shallow  waters,”  says 
Sir  Grenville,  “ are  caught  great  quantities  of  fish,  by 
forming  curved  lines  or  palisades  some  way  out  to  sea, 
with  palm  branches,  by  which  the  fish  that  come  up  with 
the  high  wrater  are  retained  when  it  recedes.  The  horrid 
polypus,  which  is,  however,  greedily  eaten,  abounds,  and 
some  are  of  enormous  size . They  prove  at  times  highly 
dangerous  to  bathers. 

<c  An  instance  of  this  occurred  two  years  since  : a 
Sardinian  captain,  bathing  at  J erbeh,  felt  one  of  his  feet 
in  the  grasp  of  one  of  these  animals  ; on  this,  with  his 
other  foot  he  tried  to  disengage  himself,  but  this  limb  was 
immediately  seized  by  another  of  the  monster’s  arms ; 
he  then,  with  his  hands,  endeavoured  to  free  himself,  but 
these  also,  in  succession,  were  firmly  grasped  by  the 
polypus,  and  the  poor  man  was  shortly  after  found 
drowned,  with  all  his  limbs  strongly  bound  together  by 
the  arms  and  legs  of  the  fish ; and  it  is  extraordinary, 
that  where  this  happened,  the  water  was  scarcely  four 
feet  in  depth.” 

Other  species  of  these  surprising  animals,  as  the 


66 


NATURE  OF  THE 


calamaries,  or  “ flying  squid,”  as  they  are  termed  by 
whalers,  have  the  power  of  propelling  themselves  through 
the  atmosphere.  u There  is  good  reason  for  believing,” 
says  Mr.  Owen,  “that  some  of  the  small,  slender-bodied 
subulate  species  of  this  genus  are  enabled  to  strike  the 
water  with  such  force  as  to  raise  themselves  above  the 
surface,  and  dart,  like  the  flying  fish,  for  a short  distance 
through  the  air.”  I have  myself  seen,  very  frequently, 
while  in  the  north  and  south  Pacific,  tens  of  thousands  of 
these  animals  dart  simultaneously  out  of  the  water  when 
pursued  by  albacore,  or  dolphins,  and  propel  themselves 
headfirst , in  a horizontal  direction,  for  eighty  or  a hun- 
dred yards,  assisting  their  progression,  probably,  by  a 
rotatory  or  screwing  motion  of  their  arms  or  tentacles, 
and  which  they  have  the  power  of  thus  moving  with  sin- 
gular velocity.  This  species  also,  as  well  as  the  large 
onychoteuthis,  I am  led  to  believe,  often  serves  the 
sperm  whale  for  food.  I have  seen,  on  several  occa- 
sions, very  large  limbs  of  the  latter  species  of  squid 
floating  on  the  surface  of  the  ocean,  appearing  as  if  bitten 
off  by  some  animal,  most  probably  by  the  sperm  whale, 
for  when  these  remains  have  been  seen,  I have  always 
looked  most  anxiously  for  those  animals,  and  have  never 
been  disappointed  in  seeing  them  within  a few  hours 
afterwards. 

One  day,  being  on  the  coast  of  Peru,  off  Paita-Head 
as  it  is  called,  which  lies  in  about  the  latitude  of  five 
degrees  south,  I was  startled  at  seeing  a remarkable 
looking  animal  raising  itself  quickly  to  the  surface  of 
the  sea  by  means  of  a number  of  very  long  flexible 


SPERM  WHALERS  FOOD. 


67 


arms,  which  it  threw  about  with  great  precision,  in  a 
rotatory  or  screwing-like  motion,  so  that  it  appeared  to 
move  itself  through  the  water  with  the  same  kind  of 
action  that  an  eight-pronged  corkscrew  would  maintain 
in  passing  through  any  penetrable  substance.  This 
curious  animal,  however,  quickly  disappeared;  and  it 
was  not  until  I had  explained  its  appearance  to  the 
captain,  that  I knew  it  to  be  a squid. 

On  another  occasion,  and  while  upon  the  Bonin 
Islands,  searching  for  shells  on  the  rocks,  which  had 
just  been  left  by  the  receding  sea- tide,  I was  much 
astonished  at  seeing  at  my  feet  a most  extraordinary 
looking  animal,  crawling  towards  the  surf,  which  had 
only  just  left  it.  I had  never  seen  one  like  it  under 
such  circumstances  before ; it  therefore  appeared  the 
more  remarkable.  It  was  creeping  on  its  eight  legs, 
which,  from  their  soft  and  flexible  nature,  bent  con- 
siderably under  the  weight  of  its  body,  so  that  it  was 
lifted  by  the  efforts  of  its  tentacula  only,  a small  dis- 
tance from  the  rocks.  It  appeared  much  alarmed  at 
seeing  me,  and  made  every  effort  to  escape,  while  I was 
not  much  in  the  humour  to  endeavour  to  capture  so 
ugly  a customer,  whose  appearance  excited  a feeling 
of  disgust,  not  unmixed  with  fear,  I however  endea- 
voured to  prevent  its  career,  by  pressing  on  one  of  its 
legs  with  my  foot,  but  although  I made  use  of  consi- 
derable force  for  that  purpose,  its  strength  was  so  great 
that  it  several  times  quickly  liberated  its  member,  in 
spite  of  all  the  efforts  I could  employ  in  this  way  on 
wet  slippery  rocks.  I now  laid  hold  of  one  of  the 


68 


NATURE  OF  THE 


tentacles  with  my  hand,  and  held  it  firmly,  so  that  the 
limb  appeared  as  if  it  would  be  torn  asunder  by  our 
united  strength.  I soon  gave  it  a powerful  jerk,  wishing 
to  disengage  it  from  the  rocks  to  which  it  clung  so 
forcibly  by  its  suckers,  which  it  effectually  resisted ; 
but  the  moment  after,  the  apparently  enraged  animal 
lifted  its  head  with  its  large  eyes  projecting  from  the 
middle  of  its  body,  and  letting  go  its  hold  of  the  rocks, 
suddenly  sprang  upon  my  arm,  which  I had  previously 
bared  to  my  shoulder,  for  the  purpose  of  thrusting  it 
into  holes  in  the  rocks  to  discover  shells,  and  clung 
with  its  suckers  to  it  with  great  power,  endeavouring  to 
get  its  beak,  which  I could  now  see,  between  the  roots 
of  its  arms,  in  a position  to  bite ! 

A sensation  of  horror  pervaded  my  whole  frame  when 
I found  this  monstrous  animal  had  affixed  itself  so 
firmly  upon  my  arm.  Its  cold  slimy  grasp  was  ex- 
tremely sickening,  and  I immediately  called  aloud  to 
the  captain,  who  was  also  searching  for  shells  at  some 
distance,  to  come  and  release  me  from  my  disgusting 
assailant— he  quickly  arrived,  and  taking  me  down  to 
the  boat,  during  which  time  I was  employed  in  keeping 
the  beak  away  from  my  hand,  quickly  released  me  by 
destroying  my  tormentor  with  the  boat  knife,  when  I 
disengaged  it  by  portions  at  a time.  This  animal  must 
have  measured  across  its  expanded  arms,  about  four 
feet,  while  its  body  wTas  not  larger  than  a large  clenched 
hand.  It  was  that  species  of  sepia,  which  is  called  by 
whalers  “ rock-squid.”  Thus  are  these  remarkable 
creatures,  from  the  different  adaptation  of  their  tentacles, 


SPERM  WHALERS  FOOD. 


69 


and  slight  modifications  of  their  bodies,  capable  of  sail- 
ing, flying,  swimming,  and  creeping  on  the  shore,  while 
their  senses,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  elaborate 
mechanism  of  their  organs,  must  possess  corresponding 
acuteness  and  perfection.  But  for  the  description  of 
the  anatomy  of  these  animals,  I must  refer  the  reader 
to  Mr.  Owen’s  masterly  paper  on  that  subject,  in 
Todd’s  Cyclopaedia  of  Anatomy,  above  quoted* 


70 


<r 

CHAPTER  VIII. 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY  OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


It  will  be  seen,  in  the  following  compilation  of  the 
anatomy  and  physiology  of  the  sperm  whale,  which  I 
have  gleaned  from  the  various  naturalists  who  have 
from  time  to  time  written  upon  these  interesting  sub- 
jects, that  I have  largely  availed  myself  of  the  inimit- 
able paper,  originally  presented  to  the  Royal  Society 
by  the  great  John  Hunter,  which  treats  of  the  structure 
and  economy  of  whales. 

I have  thought  proper  to  reprint  nearly  the  whole 
of  this  paper,  because  of  the  exceedingly  interesting 
nature  of  its  contents,— not  because  it  does  not  treat 
solely  of  the  anatomy  of  the  sperm  whale,  but  because 
it  contains  passages  so  highly  original  and  profound, 
not  only  of  whales  in  general,  and  of  the  sperm  whale 
in  particular,  that  to  have  left  this  article  without  it, 
a mere  barren  chapter  would  have  presented  itself, 
wholly  without  interest. 

For  although  the  structural  and  functional  develope- 
ments  of  several  kinds  of  whales  are  considered  in  that 
learned  paper,  the  peculiarities  of  which  are  exposed 
with  amazing  judgment  by  our  great  naturalist,  still 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY. 


71 


the  reader  will  observe  that  there  is  a strong  analogy 
among  them  in  the  internal  arrangement  of  their  organs  ; 
as  in  the  stomach,  liver,  parts  of  generation  in  both 
sexes,  and  also  in  the  kidney,  lungs,  and  brain;  and 
where  they  differ  in  organic  development,  the  gifted 
author  beautifully  describes  the  alteration  and  its  object. 
In  fact,  as  far  as  I have  examined,  and  I believe  that  I 
have  perused  every  writer  of  note  on  these  subjects,  there 
is  not  a paper,  or  any  work  onYecord,  equal  in  any  de- 
gree to  that  which  was  produced  by  Hunter ; for  although 
much,  very  much,  remains  to  be  known  of  the  struc- 
ture and  economy  of  the  sperm  and  other  whales,  yet 
Hunter  threw  more  light  upon  those  difficult  subjects 
during  the  few  years  of  his  observation,  than  all  his 
predecessors  or  followers,  (notwithstanding  that  a host 
of  naturalists  have  exerted  themselves  to  increase  the 
quantity  which  he  left  behind  him),  which  will  prove  a 
never  failing  monument  to  his  fame,  and  which  some 
of  his  continental  neighbours  have  found  too  magnifi- 
cent to  publicly  perceive. 

I have  also  availed  myself  of  an  original  paper  by 
Dr.  Alderson,  read  in  April  1825,  before  the  Cambridge 
Philosophical  Society,  on  the  external  form  of  a sperm 
whale  which  was  thrown  ashore  at  Turnstall  in  York- 
shire, in  the  same  year,  and  which  also  contains  de- 
scriptions of  some  of  the  internal  organs,  which  I shall 
insert  under  their  proper  heads  ; and  I have  added  a few 
observations  made  by  Mr.  Bennett,  before  the  Zoological 
Society  of  London,  as  late  as  1837,  relative  to  the  eye, 
and  some  of  the  teeth  of  this  interesting  cetacean. 


72 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


This  part  of  the  hook  will  likewise  contain  a short 
description  of  the  skeleton  of  the  sperm  whale  preserved 
at  Burton- Constable,  which  I have  been  enabled  to 
give  through  the  kind  permission  of  Sir  Clifford  Corn* 
stable,  Bart,  to  whom  the  skeleton  belongs.  I have  also 
availed  myself  of  an  extract  from  Professor  Jacobs,  on 
the  structure  of  the  skin.  These,  I believe,  will  pretty 
nearly  comprise  all  that  is  at  present  known  on  these 
subjects  ; but  I have  good  reason  to  hope,  that  before 
long  I shall  be  enabled,  with  the  assistance  of  a cele- 
brated naturalist,  to  produce  from  this  interesting  animal 
its  entire  and  minute  anatomy* 


OF  THE  SKELETON. 

a The  bones  alone  (says  Hunter)  in  many  animals,  when 
properly  articulated  into  what  is  called  the  skeleton, 
give  the  general  shape  and  character  of  the  animal. 
Thus  a quadruped  is  distinguished  from  a bird,  and 
even  one  quadruped  from  another,  it  only  requiring  a skin 
to  be  thrown  over  the  skeleton  to  make  the  species  known ; 
but  this  is  not  so  decidedly  the  case  with  this  order  of 
animals,  for  the  skeleton  in  them  does  not  give  us  the 
true  shape.  An  immense  head,  a small  neck,  few  ribs, 
and  in  many  a short  sternum,  and  no  pelvis,  with  a long 
spine  terminating  in  a point,  require  more  than  a skin 
to  be  laid  over  them  to  give  the  regular  and  character- 
istic form  of  the  animal.  The  bones  of  the  anterior  ex~ 
tremity  give  no  idea  of  the  shape  of  a fin,  the  form  of 
which  wholly  depends  upon  its  covering.  The  different 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


73 


parts  of  the  skeleton  are  so  enclosed,  and  the  spaces 
between  the  projecting  parts  are  so  filled  up  as  to  be 
altogether  concealed,  giving  the  animal  externally  a 
uniform  and  elegant  form,  resembling  an  insect  enveloped 
in  its  chrysalis  coat.  The  bones  of  the  head  are  in 
general  so  large  as  to  render  the  cavity  which  contains 
the  brain  but  a small  part  of  the  whole,  while  in  the 
human  species  and  in  birds  this  cavity  constitutes  the 
principal  bulk  of  the  head.  This  is  perhaps  most  remark- 
able in  the  spermaceti  whale,  for  on  a general  view  of  the 
bones  of  the  head  it  is  impossible  to  determine  where 
the  cavity  of  the  skull  lies,  till  led  to  it  by  the  foramen 
magnum  occipitale. 

“ Some  of  the  bones  in  one  genus  differ  from  those  of 
another;  the  lower  jaw  is  an  instance  of  this.  In  the 
spermaceti  and  bottle-nose  whales,  the  grampus  and  the 
porpoise,  the  lower  jaws,  especially  at  the  posterior  ends, 
resemble  each  other,  but  in  the  large  and  small  whale- 
bone whales  the  shape  differs  considerably.  The  num- 
ber of  some  particular  bones  varies  likewise  very  much. 
The  structure  of  the  bones  is  similar  to  that  of  quadru- 
peds; they  are  composed  of  an  animal  substance  and 
an  earth  which  is  not  animal.  These  seem  only  to  be 
mechanically  mixed,  or  rather  the  earth  thrown  into  the 
interstices  of  the  animal  part.  In  the  bones  of  fishes 
this  does  not  seem  to  be  the  case,  the  earth  in  many 
fish  being  so  united  with  the  animal  part  as  to  ren- 
der them  transparent,  which  is  not  the  case  when  the 
animal  part  is  removed  by  steeping  the  bone  in  caustic 

E 


74 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


alkali;  nor  is  the  animal  part  so  transparent  when 
deprived  of  the  earth. 

efi  The  bones  are  less  compact  than  those  of  quad- 
rupeds  that  are  similar  to  them.  Their  form  somewhat 
resembles  what  takes  place  in  the  quadruped,  at  least  in 
those  whose  uses  are  similar ; as  the  vetebrse,  ribs,  and 
bones  of  the  anterior  extremities,  have  their  articulation 
alike,  though  not  in  all  of  them.  The  articulations  of 
the  lower  jaw  of  the  carpus,  metacarpus,  and  fingers,  are 
exceptions.  The  articulation  of  the  lower  jaw  is  not  by 
simple  contact,  either  single  or  double,  joined  by  a cap- 
sular ligament,  as  in  the  quadruped,  but  by  a very  thick 
intermediate  substance  of  the  ligamentous  kind,  so  inter- 
woven that  its  parts  move  on  each  other,  in  the  inter™ 
slices  of  which  is  an  oik  This  thick  matted  substance 
may  answer  the  same  purpose  as  the  double  joint  in  the 
quadruped, 

“ The  two  fins  are  analogous  to  the  anterior  extremi- 
ties of  the  quadruped,  and  are  also  similar  in  construction. 
A fin  is  composed  of  a scapula,  os  humeri,  ulna,  radius, 
carpus  and  metacarpus,  in  which  last  may  be  included  the 
fingers,  because  the  number  of  bones  are  those  wdiicli 
might  be  called  fingers,  although  they  are  not  separated, 
but  included  in  one  general  covering  with  the  meta- 
carpus. They  have  nothing  analogous  to  the  thumb, 
and  the  number  of  bones  in  each  is  different ; in  the 
forefinger  there  are  five  bones,  in  the  middle  and  ring 
fingers  seven,  and  in  the  little  finger  four. 

“ The  articulations  of  the  carpus,  metacarpus,  and 
fingers,  are  different  to  those  of  the  quadruped,  not 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


75 


being  by  capsular  ligament,  but  by  intermediate  cartilages 
connected  to  each  bone.  These  cartilages  between  the 
different  bones  of  the  fingers  are  of  considerable  length, 
being  nearly  equal  to  one  half  of  that  of  the  bone,  and  this 
construction  of  the  parts  gives  firmness,  with  some  degree 
of  pliability  to  the  whole.  As  this  order  of  animals  can- 
not  be  said  to  have  a pelvis,  they  of  course  have  no  os 
sacrum,  and  therefore  the  vertebrae  are  continued  on 
to  the  end  of  the  tail,  but  with  no  distinction  between 
those  of  the  loins  and  tail.  But,  as  these  vertebrae 
alone  would  not  have  had  sufficient  surface  to  give  rise 
to  the  muscles  requisite  to  give  motion  to  the  tail,  there 
are  bones  added  to  the  fore  part  of  some  of  the  first  ver» 
tebrae  of  the  tail,  similar  to  the  spinal  processes  on  the 
posterior  surface.55 

Having  discovered,  through  the  kindness  of  Mr. 
Pearsall,  of  Hull,  that  the  skeleton  of  an  adult  male 
sperm  whale  had  been  preserved  at  the  seat  of  Sir  Clif- 
ford Constable,  Bart.,  at  Burton-Constable  in  Yorkshire, 
about  nine  miles  north  of  Hull,  I embraced  an  oppor- 
tunity which  offered  itself  to  visit  it,  for  the  purpose  of 
gaining  permission  of  Sir  Clifford  to  inspect  this  enor- 
mous and  magnificent  specimen  of  osseous  framework 
which  adorns  his  domain.  The  whale  to  which  this 
skeleton  belonged  was  cast  on  the  coast  of  Yorkshire,  at 
a place  called  Turnstall,  in  the  Holderness,  in  1825,  and 
which  was  claimed  by  Sir  Clifford,  he  being  lord  of  the 
seigniories  of  Holderness.  Its  skeleton  was  preserved, 
and  was  articulated  only  about  two  years  since,  I believe 
principally  under  the  superintendence  of  Mr.  Wallis,  of 


76 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


Hull,  surgeon,  who  was  singularly  capable  of  under- 
taking its  erection,  from  the  great  attention  he  had  paid 
to  the  anatomy  of  some  other  whales,  especially  to  that 
of  the  tinner  and  balaena  mysticetus.  This  gentleman 
also  possesses  much  valuable  information  on  the  anatomy 
of  the  junction  of  the  upper  part  of  the  trachea  with  the 
lower  portion  of  the  blow-hole  in  these  latter  creatures, 
which  I was  much  gratified  to  find  fully  confirms  the 
statements  I have  made  relative  to  the  non-ejection  of 
water  from  the  blow-hole,  and  with  which  Mr,  Wallis 
fully  coincides.  I cannot  close  these  few  observations 
without  embracing  the  opportunity,  now  presenting  itself, 
of  thanking  Sir  Clifford  and  Lady  Constable  for  the  kind 
assistance  which  they  rendered  me,  in  procuring  the 
information  I required  ; indeed  a pleasant  rivalry  was 
manifested  among  the  scientific  gentlemen  of  Hull,  in 
showing  and  explaining  to  me  all  that  they  knew  respect- 
ing the  leviathans  of  the  deep,  of  which  the  Museum  of 
Natural  Hi  story  at  Hull  can  boast  of  several  fine  skele- 
tons,  particularly  of  that  of  a finback  of  gigantic  dimen- 
sions,  and  which  was  prepared  by  Mr.  Wallis.  They 
have  also  the  skeletons  of  a bottle-nosed  whale,  and  that 
of  a porpoise,  besides  one  of  the  two-toothed  whale,  and 
the  stuffed  integuments  of  the  foetus  of  a balsena  mysti- 
cetus,  or  Greenland  whale. 

The  description  of  the  skeleton  of  the  sperm  whale  at 
Burton-Constable,  which  I shall  presently  give,  interests 
me  exceedingly,  principally  on  account  of  its  being  the 
only  specimen  of  the  kind  in  Europe  or  in  the  world, 
and  also  because  it  will  tend  to  set  at  rest  the  various 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


77 


opinions  which  have  been  hazarded  upon  the  number  of 
bones  which  the  skeleton  of  this  kind  of  whale  possesses. 
It  will  be  seen,  if  M.  F.  Cuvier’s  account  be  referred  to, 
published  in  his  work  on  whales  in  1836,  that  we  are 
again  destined  to  differ  very  much,  particularly  with 
respect  to  the  number  of  the  cervical  and  dorsal  ver- 
tebrae, and  consequently  in  the  number  of  the  ribs  also. 

It  is  proper  to  mention  here,  that  although  the  whale 
from  wThich  this  skeleton  has  been  procured  was  a fine 
full-grown  male,  and  somewhat  aged,  as  the  ossified 
parts  of  its  fins  and  general  appearance  of  the  bones 
indicate,  still  it  was  not  one  of  the  largest  of  this  kind 
of  whale,  as  the  author  had  an  opportunity  of  measuring 
one  which  was  captured  at  the  Japan  fishery,  that  mea- 
sured eighty-four  feet  in  length ! while  the  individual  to 
which  the  skeleton  under  consideration  belonged,  mea- 
sured, shortly  after  death,  only  fifty-eight  feet  six  inches, 
according  to  Dr.  Alderson. 


General  Description  of  the  Skeleton  of  an  adult  male 
Sperm  Whale  in  the  possession  of  Sir  Clifford  Con - 
stable , Bart.,  at  Burton- Constable,  near  Hull . 

GENERAL  CHARACTERS. 

Chest  somewhat  circular  in  form ; neck  very  short ; 
the  cranium  forming  rather  more  than  a third  of  the 
whole  length  of  the  skeleton  ; great  length  of  the  ter- 
minal vertebrae. 

Extreme  length  of  the  skeleton,  49  feet  7 inches  ; ex- 
treme breadth  of  the  chest,  8 feet  inches  ; extreme 


78 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


height  of  the  chest,  from  the  spinous  processes  of  the 
dorsal  vertebrae  to  the  lower  portion  of  the  sternum, 
8 feet  2 inches ; extreme  length  of  the  chest  from  the 
first  to  the  last  rib,  7 feet  4 inches  ; depth  of  the  in- 
terior  of  the  chest,  posteriorly  from  the  inferior  portion 
of  the  body  of  the  last  dorsal  vertebra  to  the  posterior 
and  superior  portion  of  the  sternum,  5 feet  8 inches  ; 
depth  of  chest,  anteriorly  from  the  inferior  portion  of  the 
atlas  to  the  superior  and  anterior  portion  of  the  sternum, 
2 feet  9 inches. 


OF  THE  CRANIUM. 

The  gigantic  skull  of  this  animal  forms  more  than  a 
third  of  the  whole  length  of  the  skeleton ; it  is  wedge™ 
shaped,  and  begins  with  a very  thin  edge  anteriorly,  and 
rises  gradually  in  height,  forming  an  angle  on  its  upper 
surface,  until  it  arrives  at  the  posterior  fourth  ; it  then 
rises  suddenly  and  forms  a thin  outward  wall,  which 
encloses  a large  crater-looking  cavity,  fitted  for  the  re- 
ception of  an  immense  mass  of  the  junk,  which,  with  the 
case,  forms  the  whole  upper  portion  of  the  head  in  the 
living  animal. 

The  extreme  length  of  the  cranium  in  this  specimen 
is  18  feet  and  § an  inch,  and  its  extreme  breadth  at 
its  mala  portions,  8 feet  4 inches ; extreme  width  at  the 
centre  of  its  wedge-shaped  portion,  5 feet  10  inches  ; ex- 
treme height  at  its  occipital  portion,  5 feet  6|  inches  ; 
the  width  of  its  condyloid  occipital  process  is  2 feet 
If  inches  ; depth  of  the  same,  1 foot  inches. 

Under  the  floor  of  the  crater-like  cavity,  the  thin  walls 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


79 


of  which  form  the  large  posterior  portion  of  the  skull,  is 
situated  the  cavity  in  which  the  brain  is  lodged  in  the 
living  animal : it  is  continuous  with  the  spinal  canal  of 
the  vertebrae,  and  measures  only  in  width  about  14 
inches,  in  length  10  inches,  and  in  depth  9 inches. 

On  the  left  side  of  the  base  of  the  skull,  near  the  root 
of  what  may  be  termed  the  vomer,  there  is  a foramen  for 
the  transmission  of  the  blowing-tube.  It  perforates  the 
floor  of  the  crater-like  cavity,  which  is  only  about  three 
inches  in  thickness,  and  in  the  recent  animal  the  spiracle 
passes  through  the  soft  parts  of  the  junk  and  case,  and 
terminates  at  the  anterior  upper  angle  of  the  head.  This 
foramen  is  nearly  round?  and  is  8|  inches  in  diameter. 
The  bones  of  the  cranium,  although  very  strong,  are 
still  porous  and  light. 


OF  THE  LOWER  JAW. 

The  lower  jaw  is  16  feet  10  inches  long,  and  forms,  in 
its  whole  length,  a slight  arch,  with  the  convexity  down- 
wards ; it  is  armed  with  forty-eight  formidable  teeth, 
twenty -four  on  each  side.  The  lower  jaw  is  formed  of 
two  lateral  pieces,  which  form  a cylindrical  symphysis 
anteriorly,  for  10  feet  5 inches  of  its  whole  length,  which 
is  at  its  posterior  junction  11|  inches  in  diameter,  and 
at  its  anterior  and  smallest  end  1\  inches  in  diameter, 
the  whole  of  which  is  formed  of  a dense  and  very 
•strong  kind  of  osseous  structure.  At  10  feet  5 inches 
from  its  anterior  extremity,  it  divides  and  forms  two 
lateral  branches,  which  rapidly  expand  in  width,  and  go 


80 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


to  form  its  articulating  portions  with  the  base  of  the 
cranium.  These  branches  become  thin,  but  broad ; they 
are  rounded  on  their  outsides,  but  are  hollowed  like  a 
shell  on  their  internal  aspects,  like  the  same  parts  in  the 
porpoise.  These  branches  are  1 foot  11  inches  in  their 
widest  or  perpendicular  parts,  and  are  6 feet  5 inches  in 
length  from  the  posterior  formation  of  the  symphysis. 
Their  articulating  surfaces,  or  condyles,  stand  in  a per- 
pendicular direction,  and  are  11  inches  long  and  7\ 
inches  wide. 


OF  THE  SPINAL  COLUMN® 

The  spinal  column,  consisting  of  forty-four  vertebrae, 
forms  nearly  a straight  line  throughout  the  whole  of  its 
extent,  except  a slight  concavity  in  the  dorsal  region  for 
the  reception  of  the  viscera  of  the  chest.  The  bones  are 
articulated  by  their  bodies  only  ; they  have  no  posterior 
articulating  surfaces,— -in  this  specimen  they  are  separate, 
and  not  anchylosed. 


OF  THE  CERVICAL  VERTEBRAE. 

These  are  only  two  in  number,  the  atlas  and  dentata : 
they  resemble  the  human  very  much  in  form,  except 
that  the  second  has  no  odontoid  process.  The  atlas  is 
in  width  3 feet  4 inches  ; in  depth,  1 foot  7\  inches  ; 
in  thickness,  6|  inches.  The  dentata  is  in  width  2 feet 
10|  inches;  in  height,  1 foot  11|  inches;  in  thickness, 
9\  inches.  This  bone  has  a thick,  but  short  spinous 
process. 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


81 


OF  THE  DORSAL  VERTEBRAE, 

These  are  ten  in  number,  whose  bodies  gradually 
increase  in  thickness  and  size  generally  as  they  become 
posterior;  the  first  being  only  inches  in  thickness 
between  the  articulating  surfaces  of  the  body  ; 1 foot 
7§  inches  in  width,  including  lateral  spines,  and  1 foot 
11^  inches  in  depth,  that  is,  from  the  superior  part  of 
the  spinous  process  to  the  inferior  portion  of  its  body, 
the  body  of  the  first  dorsal  vertebra  itself  being  12| 
inches  in  depth,  namely,  from  the  floor  of  the  spinal 
canal  to  the  inferior  portion  of  its  body,  while  the  tenth, 
or  last,  is  in  thickness,  between  the  articulating  surfaces 
of  its  body,  8|  inches  ; in  its  width  2 feet  4 inches, 
including  lateral  spines,  and  in  its  depth,  including 
spinous  process,  2 feet  7|  inches  ; the  depth  of  its  body, 
from  the  floor  of  the  spinal  canal  to  the  lower  surface,  is 
the  same  as  the  first,  12|  inches,  being  an  exception  to 
its  general  increase  of  size  over  the  first. 

OF  THE  TERMINAL  VERTEBRAE. 

These  are  in  number  thirty-two : the  first  of  which  is 
in  height,  2 feet  8 inches ; in  width,  2 feet  7 inches, 
including  spinous  processes  ; and  in  thickness,  between 
intervertebral  substance,  8|  inches.  The  height  of  the 
body  of  this  vertebra  alone  is  1 foot  1|  inches,  and  the 
width  of  the  same,  without  lateral  spines,  1 foot  3 inches. 
The  bodies  of  these  terminal  vertebrae  gradually  increase 
from  the  first  in  height,  width,  and  thickness,  until  the 

E 2 


82 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


fifteenth,  while  their  superior  spines,  from  being  thin  and 
narrow,  and  forming  an  angle  of  forty-five  degrees, 
slanting  posteriorly,  as  in  most  other  animals,  become 
more  perpendicular,  shorter  and  thicker.  Their  anterior 
double  spines  (rudiments  of  the  articulating  surfaces  for 
the  ribs)  become  more  elevated,  or  nearer  to  the  top  of 
the  superior  spines.  When  at  the  fifteenth,  these  double 
spines  disappear,  and  one  short  spine  is  left.  The 
fifteenth  terminal  vertebra  is  in  height,  1 foot  1 1 inches  ; 
in  width,  1 foot  6 inches ; in  thickness,  between  the 
intervertebral  substance,  ll|  inches  ; while  the  height  of 
its  body,  without  the  superior  spine,  is  1 foot  5 inches. 
This  fifteenth  terminal  vertebra  has  only  very  slight 
rudiments  of  the  lateral  spines  remaining,  while  the  first 
terminal  has  them  in  length  8|  inches,  and  in  breadth 
5 \ inches.  From  the  fifteenth  to  the  twentieth  ter- 
minal vertebra  there  is  a gradual  decrease  in  size,  losing 
also  their  upper  spines,  and  becoming  nearly  round  in 
figure.  From  the  twentieth  to  the  thirty-second  they 
taper  off  rapidly,  and  become  somewhat  quadrilateral  in 
form,  with  flat  indented  sides*  The  last  bone  of  the 
vertebrae  is  nearly  round,  and  is  about  1|  inches  in 
diameter. 


OF  THE  SPINAL  CANAL. 

In  passing  through  the  atlas  and  dentata,  the  spinal 
chord  is  accommodated  with  a canal  of  a triangular 
figure,  having  the  base  downwards  ; it  is  8 inches  in 
depth,  and  10  inches  in  width  at  the  base.  At  the 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


83 


seventh  dorsal  vertebra,  the  canal  is  6\  inches  in  depth, 
and  7 inches  wide, — -at  the  sixth  terminal  vertebra  it 
still  continues  of  a triangular  figure,  but  is  only  4 J inches 
in  depth,  and  3 inches  in  width,— at  the  twentieth,  the 
canal  becomes  of  an  oval  form,  making  a foramen 
through  the  root  of  a short  and  thick  spinous  process 
large  enough  to  admit  one’s  finger,  which  terminates  the 
spinal  canal, — the  other  terminal  vertebrae  have  depres- 
sions in  their  superior  surfaces,  as  if  a cauda  equina 
was  distributed  upon  them. 

At  the  inferior  surface  of  the  eleventh  terminal  ver- 
tebra, a range  of  what  may  be  termed  inferior  spines 
commences ; they  are  articulated  to  the  under  surfaces 
of  the  bodies  of  the  vertebrae  by  a bifid  portion  of  the 
superior  end  of  the  process  ; th e first  piece  thus  attached 
to  the  under  part  of  the  body  of  the  eleventh  terminal 
vertebra,  and  hanging  perpendicularly  from  it,  is  1 foot 
6 inches  long,  7 inches  in  width,  and  2 inches  in 
thickness  ; its  width  being  on  a line  with  the  length  of 
the  vertebral  column  : these  pieces  are  in  number  the 
same  as  the  ribs  (ten).  The  second  is  longer  and  wider 
than  the  first , being  2 feet  long,  8 inches  wide,  and  2 
inches  thick ; the  third  is  rather  shorter,  but  a little 
wider  than  the  second ; but  the  fourth  is  smaller  alto- 
gether, and  the  others  gradually  decrease  in  length  and 
width,  but  not  in  thickness,  until  the  last , which  mea- 
sures 5 inches  in  length,  and  5|  inches  in  breadth,  and 
is  still  attached  to  its  vertebra  by  a double,  or  bifid 
articulation. 


84 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


OF  THE  PELVIS. 

The  rudimentary  pelvis  is  merely  formed  of  two 
broad  flat  bones,  which  in  this  specimen  are  ossified  at 
their  symphysis ; they  are  wholly  supported  by  the  soft 
parts  in  the  living  animal,  and  appear  like  the  os  pubis 
of  a gigantic  pelvis,  being  rounded  anteriorly  and  hol- 
lowed posteriorly;  standing  in  an  oblique  position,  on  a 
line  with  the  abdomen,  each  bone  forms  an  irregular 
quadrilateral  piece,  about  1 foot  5 inches  broad  each 
way,  and  is  in  thickness  3 inches. 


OF  THE  RIBS. 

These  are  ten  in  number,  which  with  the  spine  and 
sternum  form  a somewhat  circular  looking  chest-"- which 
on  account  of  the  shortness  of  the  neck,  is  situated 
close  to  the  posterior  part  of  the  head.  The  ribs  are  in 
structure  exceedingly  hard  and  compact,  and  appear  of 
small  diameter  when  the  size  of  the  animal  is  com- 
pared,—they  are  nearly  circular  in  form,  having  no 
hollow  for  the  intercostal  vessels,— they  are  slightly 
flattened  at  their  sternal  extremities. 

The  first  has  but  one  articulating  surface,  that  is  to 
the  transverse  process  of  the  first  dorsal  vertebra,— the 
second , third , and  fourth  have  two  ; that  is,  the  posterior 
articulating  surface  of  the  second  rib  is  articulated  to 
the  transverse  process  of  the  second  dorsal  vertebra, 
while  its  anterior  articulating  surface  is  articulated  to 
the  body  of  the  first  vertebra,  and  this  same  kind  of 
articulation  follows  to  the  third  and  fourth  ribs  ; but 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE 


85 


the  fifth  rib  is  articulated  by  its  posterior  articulating 
surface  to  the  transverse  process  of  the  fifth  vertebra, 
and  by  its  two  anterior  articulating  surfaces  between  and 
to  the  bodies  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  dorsal  vertebra 
the  same  kind  of  articulation  is  followed  to  the  eighth 
rib,  the  ninth  being  merely  attached  to  one  surface  on 
the  transverse  process  of  the  ninth  dorsal  vertebra ; the 
tenth  and  last  is  articulated  also  by  one  surface  to  the 
transverse  process  of  the  tenth  dorsal  vertebra.  The 
first  rib  is  in  span  4 feet  inches,  and  forms  an  arch 
of  1 foot  8 1 inches  in  height, — the  second  rib  is  in  span 
5 feet  6|  inches,  and  forms  an  arch  of  2 feet  4|  inches 
in  height,— -the  third  rib  is  in  span  6 feet,  and  forms  an 
arch  of  2 feet  9|  inches,— the  fourth  rib  is  in  span  6 
feet  4|  inches,  and  forms  an  arch  of  2 feet  9|  inches  in 
height,— the  fifth  rib  is  in  span  6 feet  \ an  inch,  and 
forms  an  arch  of  2 feet  10 \ inches, — the  sixth  rib  is  in 
span  5 feet  11  inches,  and  forms  an  arch  of  2 feet  8 
inches  in  height.  The  rest  of  the  ribs  become  rapidly 
shorter  and  straighter,  until  we  find  the  tenth  and  last 
having  a span  of  4 feet  3 inches,  and  forming  an  arch 
of  1 foot  and  \ an  inch  only  in  height.  The  first  rib 
is  an  exception  to  the  general  form  of  the  others,  it 
being  fiat  and  broad  like  the  human,  the  rest  of  the 
ribs  being  nearly  round  ; it  is  in  width  inches,  and  in 
thickness  3 inches,  the  fourth  measures  3\  inches  by  4 
in  diameter.  The  length  of  the  cartilage  of  the  fifth 
rib  must  have  been  about  three  feet. 


86 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


OF  THE  STERNUM. 

The  sternum  is  formed  of  three  bones  and  a small 
ensiform  portion ; the  anterior  piece  is  of  a broad  irregu- 
lar figure,  is  by  much  the  largest  of  the  three,  is  placed 
in  an  oblique  direction,  and  is  hollowed  out  like  a bird’s 
interiorly  ; it  is  3 feet  7|  inches  in  width,  and  in  length 
2 feet  10|  inches— 'this  anterior  piece  is  perforated  in 
its  middle  by  an  oblong  opening  1 foot  2 inches  in 
length,  and  inches  in  width  ; the  second  piece  is 
much  smaller  than  the  first,  it  is  flat  and  irregular  in 
form,  and  is  in  length  1 foot  1 inch,  and  in  breadth 
11  inches  ; the  third  piece  expands  very  much,  is  more 
hollowed  interiorly  than  the  first , and  measures  in 
width  1 foot  8|  inches,  and  is  in  length  1 foot  5|  inches, 
and  is  in  form  something  like  the  breast  of  a turtle. 
The  ensiform  portion  is  12  inches  in  length,  and  9 inches 
in  breadth  at  its  widest  part,  making  the  whole  length 
of  the  sternum  to  consist  of  6 feet  5 inches,  and  in 
breadth  at  its  widest  part  3 feet  7|  inches. 


OF  THE  SCAPULA. 

There  are  no  clavicles.  The  scapula  forms  a flat 
triangular  piece,  with  the  apex  downwards  ; it  has  no 
spines,  but  there  are  two  projecting  eorocoid-like  pro- 
cesses, situated  at  the  lower  part  of  its  anterior  angle, 
near  to  where  it  is  articulated  with  the  humerus  : the 
scapula  is  2 feet  9 inches  in  width  at  its  upper  edge, 
and  its  neck  is  10  inches  in  width  at  its  narrowest 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


87 


part,  and  it  is  3 inches  thick  at  its  upper  edge, —its 
glenoid  cavity  is  in  length  9 inches,  and  in  width  8 
inches. 


OF  THE  BONES  WHICH  FORM  THE  FINS. 

The  bones  which  form  the  fins  are  together  4 feet  4 
inches  in  length,  and  1 foot  10  inches  at  their  widest 
part. 

Of  the  Humerus,— The  humerus  is  1 foot  7|  inches 
in  length,  its  diameter  at  the  head  is  9|  inches.  The 
diameter  of  its  shaft  is  6|  inches.  It  expands  and 
softens  at  its  carpal  end,  which  is  articulated  with  a 
radius  and  ulna,  which  are  both  ossified  in  this  specimen 
to  the  humerus.  The  radius  and  ulna  are  1 foot  1 inch 
in  length.  The  radius  is  7 inches  broad  at  the  middle 
of  its  shaft,  while  the  ulna  is  5|  inches  broad  at  the 
same  part,  and  both  are  3|  inches  in  thickness ; they 
expand  a little  at  their  carpal  extremities. 

Of  the  Carpus,— There  are  seven  loose  square  bones 
of  the  carpus,  which  are  arranged  in  a straight  line 
across  the  ends  of  the  radius  and  ulna ; they  are  each 
about  3 inches  square,  except  that  to  which  the  little 
finger  is  attached;  that  is  long  and  narrow,  being  5 
inches  long  and  2 J inches  wide. 

Of  the  Phalanges,— There  are  five  phalanges ; the  three 
middle  ones  having  four  bones  each,  and  the  two  outer 
ones  having  only  three  each. 


88 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


There  is  a long  cylindrical  bone  that  is  not  articulated, 
which  is  slightly  curved,  and  is  in  length  2 feet  3 inches, 
and  5 \ inches  in  diameter;  it  appears  to  have  been 
tipped  with  cartilage  at  both  ends,  and  has  probably 
belonged  to  the  root  of  the  genital  organe 

OF  THE  MUSCLES* 

The  flesh  or  muscles  of  this  order  of  animals,”  savs 
Hunter,  £<  is  red,  resembling  that  of  most  quadrupeds, 
perhaps  more  like  that  of  the  bull,  or  horse,  than  any 
other  animal;  some  of  it  is  very  firm,  and  about  the 
breast  and  belly  it  is  mixed  with  tendon.  Two  por- 
tions of  muscles  of  the  same  shape,  one  from  the  psoas 
muscle  of  the  whale,  the  other  of  an  ox,  when  weighed 
in  air,  were  both  exactly  five  hundred  and  two  grains, 
but  weighed  in  water,  the  portion  of  the  whale  was  four 
grains  heavier  than  the  other.  It  is  probable  therefore 
that  the  necessary  equilibrium  between  the  water  and 
the  animal  is  produced  by  the  oil. 

Although  the  body  and  tail  are  composed  of  a series 
of  bones  connected  together,  and  moved  as  in  fish,  yet 
their  movements  are  produced  by  long  muscles,  with 
long  tendons,  which  render  the  body  thicker,  while  the 
tail  at  its  stem  is  smaller  than  that  of  any  other  swim- 
mer whose  principal  motion  is  the  same.  Why  this 
mode  of  applying  the  moving  powers  should  not  have 
been  used  in  fish,  is  probably  not  so  easily  answered; 
but  in  fish  the  muscles  of  the  body  are  of  nearly  the 
same  length  as  the  vertebrae.  The  depressor  muscles  of 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


89 


the  tail,  which  are  similar  in  situation  to  the  psose, 
make  two  very  large  ridges  on  the  lower  part  of  the 
cavity  of  the  belly,  rising  much  higher  than  the  spine, 
and  the  lower  part  of  the  aorta  passes  between  them. 
These  two  large  muscles,  instead  of  being  inserted  into 
two  extremities,  as  in  quadrupeds,  go  to  the  tail,  which 
may  be  considered  in  this  order  of  animals  as  the  two 
posterior  extremities  united  into  one. 

Their  muscles  a very  short  time  after  death  lose  their 
fibrous  structure,  become  as  uniform  in  texture  as  clay 
or  dough,  and  even  softer  ! This  change  is  not  from 
putrefaction,  as  they  continue  to  be  free  from  any  un- 
pleasant smell,  and  is  most  remarkable  in  the  psose 
muscles  and  those  of  the  back. 


OF  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  TAIL® 

The  mode  in  which  the  tail  is  constructed  is  perhaps  as 
beautiful,  as  to  the  mechanism,  as  any  part  of  the 
animal.  It  is  wholly  composed  of  three  layers  of  ten- 
dinous  fibres,  covered  by  the  common  cutis  and  cuticle ; 
two  of  these  layers  are  external,  the  other  internal. 
The  direction  of  the  fibres  of  the  external  layers  is  the 
same  as  in  the  tail,  forming  a stratum  about  one-third 
of  an  inch  thick,  but  varying  in  this  respect  as  the  tail 
is  thicker  or  thinner. 

The  middle  layer  is  composed  entirely  of  tendinous 
fibres  passing  directly  across  between  the  two  external 
ones  above  described,  their  length  being  in  proportion 
to  the  thickness  of  the  tail;  a structure  which  gives 


90 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


amazing  strength  to  this  part.  The  substance  of  the 
tail  is  so  firm  and  compact  that  the  vessels  retain  their 
dilated  state  even  when  cut  across,  and  this  section 
consists  of  a large  vessel  surrounded  by  as  many  small 
ones  as  can  come  in  contact  with  its  external  surface ; 
which  of  these  are  arteries  and  which  veins,  I do  not 
knowc  The  fins  are  merely  covered  with  a strong  con- 
densed adipose  membrane. 


OF  THE  SKIN. 

The  covering  in  this  order  of  animals  consists  of  a 
cuticle  and  cutis ; the  cuticle  is  somewhat  similar  to  that 
on  the  sole  of  the  foot  in  the  human  species,  and 
appears  to  be  made  up  of  a number  of  layers  which 
separate  by  slight  putrefaction,  but  this  I suspect  arises 
in  some  degree  from  there  being  a succession  of  cuticles 
formed.  It  has  no  degree  of  elasticity  or  toughness, 
but  tears  easily,  nor  do  its  fibres  appear  to  have  any 
particular  direction.  The  internal  stratum  is  tough 
and  thick,  and  in  the  spermaceti  whale  its  internal 
surface  when  separated  from  the  cutis  is  just  like  velvet, 
each  pile  standing  firm  in  its  place,  but  this  is  not  so 
distinguished  in  some  of  the  others. 

It  is  the  cuticle  which  gives  the  colour  to  the  animal ; 
and  in  parts  that  are  dark,  I think  I have  seen  a dirty 
coloured  substance  washed  away  in  the  separation  of  the 
cuticle  from  the  cutis,  which  must  be  a kind  of  rete 
mucosum. 

The  cutis  in  this  tribe  is  extremely  villous  on  its 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


external  surface,  answering  to  the  rough  surface  of  the 
cuticle,  and  forming  in  some  parts  small  ridges,  similar 
to  those  on  the  human  fingers  and  toes.  The  villi  are 
soft  and  pliable,  they  float  in  water,  and  each  is  longer 
or  shorter  according  to  the  size  of  the  animal.  In  the 
spermaceti  whale,  they  were  about  a quarter  of  an  inch 
long  ; in  the  grampus,  bottle-nose,  and  piked  whales 
much  shorter;  in  all  they  are  extremely  vascular.  The 
cutis  seems  to  be  the  termination  of  the  cellular  membrane 
of  the  body  more  closely  united , having  smaller  inter- 
stices, and  becoming  more  compact.  This  alteration  in 
the  texture  is  so  sudden  as  to  make  an  evident  dis- 
tinction between  what  is  solely  connecting  membrane 
and  skin,  and  is  not  evident  in  lean  animals,  for,  in  the 
change  from  fat  to  lean,  the  skin  does  not  undergo  an 
alteration  equal  to  what  takes  place  in  the  adipose  mem- 
brane, although  it  may  be  observed  that  the  skin  itself  is 
diminished  in  thickness.  In  fat  animals  the  distinction 
between  skin  and  cellular  membrane  is  much  less,  the 
gradations  from  one  to  the  other  seeming  to  be  slower, 
for  the  cells  of  both  membrane  and  skin  being  loaded 
with  fat,  the  whole  has  more  the  appearance  of  one  uni- 
form substance . This  uniformity  of  the  adipose  mem- 
brane is  most  observable  in  the  whale,  seal,  hog,  and  the 
human  species  ; and  is  not  only  visible  in  the  raw,  but  in 
the  dressed  hides,  for  in  dressed  skins  the  external  is 
much  more  compact  in  texture  than  the  inner  surface, 
and  is  in  common  very  tough. ” 

Professor  Jacob,  of  Dublin,  regarding  the  skin  of  these 
animals,  states,  “ that  structure  in  which  the  oil  is 


92 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


deposited,  denominated  blubber,  is  the  true  skin  of  the 
animal,  modified  certainly  for  the  purpose  of  holding 
this  fluid  oil,  but  still  being  the  true  skin.  Upon  close 
examination  it  is  found  to  consist  of  an  interlacement  of 
fibres  crossing  each  other  in  every  direction,  as  in  com- 
mon skin,  but  more  open  in  texture,  to  make  room  for 
the  oik  Taking  the  hog  as  an  example  of  an  animal 
covered  with  an  external  layer  of  fat,  we  find  that  we 
can  raise  the  true  skin  without  any  difficulty,  leaving  a 
thick  layer  of  cellular  membrane  loaded  with  fat  of  the 
same  nature  as  that  in  the  other  parts  of  the  body;  on 
the  contrary,  in  the  whale  it  is  altogether  impossible  to 
raise  any  layer  of  skin  distinct  from  the  rest  of  the 
blubber,  however  thick  it  may  be  ; and  in  flensing  a 
whale  the  operator  removes  this  blubber,  or  skin,  from 
the  muscular  parts  beneath,  merely  dividing  with  his 
spade  the  connecting  cellular  membrane.” — Dublin  Phil. 
Journal , voh  i.  p.  35 6 . 

This  construction  of  the  skin  appears  to  be  useful  in 
obviating  the  effects  of  pressure  when  the  animal  is  situ- 
ated in  the  depths  of  the  ocean,  and  which  ei  operates,” 
says  Sir  William  Jardine,  “like  so  much  caoutchouc, 
possessing  a density  and  resistance  which  the  more  it  is 
pressed  it  resists  the  more,” 


OF  THE  TEETH. 

“ There  is  a very  great  variety,”  says  Hunter,  “ in  the 
formation  of  the  mouths  of  this  tribe  of  animals.  Some 
catch  their  food  by  means  of  teeth,  which  are  in  both 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


93 


jaws,  as  the  porpoise  and  grampus  ; in  others  they  are 
only  in  one  jaw,  as  the  spermaceti  whale ; and  in  the 
large  bottle-nose,  described  by  Dale,  there  are  only  two 
small  teeth  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  lower  jaw.  In 
the  nar- whale  only  two  tusks  in  the  forepart  of  the 
upper  jaw,  while  in  some  others  there  are  none  at  all. 
The  teeth  are  not  divisible  into  different  classes,  as  in 
quadrupeds,  but  are  all  pointed  teeth,  and  are  commonly 
a good  deal  similar.  Each  tooth  is  a double  cone,  one 
point  being  fastened  in  the  gum,  the  other  projecting ; 
they  are,  however,  not  all  exactly  of  this  shape.  In 
some  species  of  porpoise  the  fang  is  flattened,  and  thin 
at  its  extremity.  In  the  spermaceti  whale,  the  body  of 
the  tooth  is  a little  curved  towards  the  back  part  of  the 
mouth — this  is  also  the  case  with  some  others.  The 
teeth  are  composed  of  animal  substance  and  earth,  similar 
to  the  bony  part  of  the  teeth  in  quadrupeds.  The  upper 
teeth  are  commonly  worn  down  upon  the  inside- — the 
lower,  on  the  outside;  this  arises  from  the  upper  jaw 
being  in  general  the  largest.  The  situation  of  the  teeth 
when  first  formed,  and  their  progress  afterwards,  as  far 
as  T have  been  able  to  observe,  is  very  different  in 
common  from  those  of  the  quadruped.  In  the  quadruped 
the  teeth  are  formed  in  the  jaw,  almost  surrounded  by  the 
alveoli  or  sockets,  and  rise  in  the  jaw  as  they  increase  in 
length,  the  covering  of  the  alveoli  being  absorbed, — they 
afterwards  rise  with  the  teeth,  covering  the  whole  fang; 
but  in  this  tribe  the  teeth  appear  to  form  in  the  gum 
upon  the  edge  of  the  jaw,  and  they  either  sink  in  the  jaw  as 
they  lengthen,  or  the  alveoli  rise  to  enclose  them ; this  last 


94 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


is  most  probable,  since  tbe  depth  of  the  jaw  is  also  in- 
creased, so  that  the  teeth  appear  to  sink  deeper  and  deeper 
in  the  jaw.  This  formation  is  readily  discovered  in  jaws 
not  full  grown,  for  the  teeth  increase  in  number  as  the 
jawr  lengthens,  as  in  other  animals.  The  posterior  part 
of  the  jaw  becoming  longer,  the  number  of  teeth  in  that 
part  increases,  the  sockets  becoming  shallower  and  shal- 
lower, and  at  last  being  only  a slight  depression.  It 
would  appear  that  they  do  not  shed  their  teeth,  nor  have 
they  new  ones  formed  similar  to  the  old,  as  is  the  case 
with  most  quadrupeds,  and  also  with  the  alligator.  I 
have  never  been  able  to  detect  young  teeth  under  the 
roots  of  the  old  ones ; and  indeed,  the  situation  in  which 
they  are  first  formed  makes  it  in  some  degree  impossible, 
if  the  young  teeth  follow  the  same  rule  in  growing  with 
the  original  ones,  as  they  probably  do  in  most  animals. 

If  it  is  true  that  the  whale  tribe  do  not  shed  their 
teeth,  in  what  way  are  they  supplied  with  new  ones,  cor- 
responding in  size  with  the  increased  size  of  the  jaw? 
It  would  appear  that  the  jaw,  as  it  increases  posteriorly, 
decays  at  the  symphysis ; and  while  the  growth  is  going 
on  there  is  a constant  succession  of  new  teeth,  by  which 
means  the  new  formed  teeth  are  proportioned  to  the  jaw. 
The  same  mode  of  growth  is  evident  in  the  elephant, 
and  in  some  degree  in  many  fish,  but  in  these  last  the 
absorption  of  the  jaw  is  from  the  whole  of  the  outside 
along  where  the  teeth  are  placed.  The  depth  of  the 
alveoli  seem  to  prove  this,  being  shallow  at  the  back  part 
of  the  jaw,  and  becoming  deeper  towards  the  middle, 
where  they  are  deepest,  the  teeth  there  having  come  to 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE 


95 


the  full  size.  From  this  forwards  they  are  again  becom- 
ing shallower— the  teeth  being  small,  the  sockets  wasting, 
and  at  the  symphysis  there  are  hardly  any  sockets  at  all. 
This  will  make  the  exact  number  of  teeth  in  any  species 
uncertain” 

Dr.  Alderson,  in  a paper  read  before  the  Cambridge 
Philosophical  Society,  May  16,  1825,  states  that  the 
number  of  teeth  which  he  found  in  the  sperm  whale  that 
was  cast  on  the  coast  of  Yorkshire,  and  which  measured 
58|  feet,  amounted  to  47  (visible);  “ two  more,”  he 
states,  “ were  found  on  cutting  down  upon  the  gums  on 
the  right  side.  In  the  skeleton,  therefore,  there  will  be 
49  teeth.  I should  hence  infer  the  animal  to  be  young, 
though,  as  they  that  were  uncut  were  the  most  posterior 
of  the  teeth,  it  is  possible  it  had  reached  its  full  growth. 
There  is  a remarkable  difference  in  the  posterior  teeth 
compared  with  the  others ; they  were  much  smaller  and 
rather  hooked,  particularly  the  last  but  one  and  last  but 
two  on  the  left  side,  and  the  last  but  two  and  last  but 
three  on  the  right  side.  The  two  teeth  at  the  symphysis 
were  much  smaller  than  those  near  them — -they  were  front 
teeth,  and  were  only  three  inches  asunder.  The  distance 
between  the  second  pair  of  teeth  nearest  the  symphysis 
(measured  within  the  teeth  at  the  gums)  is  inches,  the 
distance  between  the  teeth  at  the  bifurcation  13  inches. 
The  upper  jaw  presented  no  teeth,  but  cavities,  lined 
with  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  mouth,  and  very  firm  ; 
into  these  cavities  the  teeth  of  the  lower  jaw  fitted  when 
the  mouth  was  closed.” 

Mr.  F.  D.  Bennett,  in  a paper  read  before  the  Zoolo- 


96 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


gical  Society,  December  10,  1836,  states,  “When  the 
young  cachalot  (sperm  whale)  has  attained  the  length  of 
34  feet,  its  teeth  are  perfectly  formed,  though  not  visible 
until  it  exceeds  28.”  Mr.  B.  found  eight  rudimentary 
teeth  on  each  side  of  the  upper  jaw  in  two  instances, 
which,  “ though  not  visible  externally  in  the  young 
cachalots,  may  be  seen  upon  the  removal  of  the  soft  parts 
from  the  interior  of  the  jaw.”  The  entire  length  of  these 
teeth  was  about  three  inches. 

In  the  lower  jaw  of  the  skeleton  of  the  sperm  whale 
at  Burton-Constable,  there  were  48  teeth — 24  on  each 
side ; but  there  were  no  indications  of  sockets  in  the 
upper  jaw. 

OF  THE  OESOPHAGUS,  STOMACH,  AND  INTESTINES. 

“ The  oesophagus  or  gullet,  as  in  other  animals,  begins 
at  the  fauces  or  posterior  part  of  the  mouth,  and  although 
circular  at  this  part  is  soon  divided  into  two  passages  by 
the  epiglottis  passing  across  it,  as  will  be  described 
hereafter.  Below  its  attachment  to  the  trachea  it  passes 
down  in  the  posterior  mediastinum,  at  some  distance 
from  the  spine,  to  which  it  is  attached  by  a broad  part  of 
the  same  membrane,  and  its  anterior  surface  makes  the 
posterior  part  of  a cavity  behind  the  pericardium.  Pass- 
ing through  the  diaphragm  it  enters  the  stomach,  and  is 
lined  with  a very  thick,  soft,  and  white  cuticle,  which  is 
continued  into  the  first  cavity  of  the  stomach.  The 
stomach,  as  in  other  animals,  lies  on  the  left  side  of  the 
body,  and  terminates  in  the  pylorus  towards  the  right. 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


97 


Those  parts  which  respect  the  nourishment  of  this 
tribe  do  not  all  so  exactly  correspond  as  in  land  ani- 
mals, for  in  these  one  in  some  degree  leads  to  the  other. 
Thus  the  teeth  in  the  ruminating  tribe  point  out  the  kind 
of  stomach,  coecum,  and  colon,  while  in  others,  as  the 
horse,  hare,  lion,  etc.,  the  appearances  of  the  teeth  only 
give  us  the  kind  of  colon  and  coecum ; but  in  this  tribe, 
whether  teeth  or  no  teeth,  the  stomachs  do  not  vary  much , 
nor  does  the  circumstance  of  coecum  seem  to  depend  on 
either  teeth  or  stomach.  The  circumstances  by  which 
from  the  form  of  one  part  we  judge  what  others  are,  fail 
us  here,  but  this  may  arise  from  not  knowing  all  the 
circumstances. 

The  stomach,  in  all  that  I have  examined,  consists  of 
several  bags,  continued  from  the  first  on  the  left  towards 
the  right,  where  the  last  terminates  in  duodenum.  The 
number  is  not  the  same  in  all ; for  in  the  porpoise, 
grampus,  and  piked  whale,  there  are  five— in  the  bottle- 
nose,  seven.  Their  size  respecting  one  another  differs 
very  considerably,  so  that  the  largest  in  one  species  may, 
in  another,  be  only  the  second.  The  two  first,  in  the 
porpoise,  bottle-nose,  and  piked  whale,  are  by  much  the 
largest— the  others  are  smaller,  though  irregularly  so. 
The  first  stomach  has,  I believe,  in  all  very  much  the 
shape  of  an  egg  with  the  small  end  downwards.  It  is 
lined  everywhere  with  a continuation  of  the  cuticle  from 
the  oesophagus.  In  the  porpoise  the  oesophagus  enters 
the  superior  end  of  the  stomach.  In  the  piked  whale  its 
entrance  is  a little  way  on  the  posterior  part  of  the  upper 
end,  and  is  oblique.  The  second  stomach  of  the  piked 

F 


98 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


whale  is  very  large,  and  rather  longer  than  the  first.  It 
is  of  the  shape  of  the  italic  passing  out  from  the  upper 
end  of  the  first,  on  its  right  side,  by  nearly  as  large  a 
beginning  as  the  body  of  the  bag— where  the  second 
stomach  begins,  the  cuticle  of  the  first  ends.  The  whole 
of  the  inside  of  this  stomach  is  thrown  into  unequal 
rugse,  appearing  like  a large  irregular  honeycomb.  This 
stomach  opens  into  the  third  by  a round  contracted 
orifice,  which  does  not  seem  to  be  valvular : the  third 
stomach  is  by  much  the  smallest,  and  appears  to  be 
only  a passage  between  the  second  and  fourth.  It  has 
no  peculiar  structure  on  the  inside,  but  terminates  in 
the  fourth  by  nearly  as  large  an  opening  as  its  beginning. 
The  fourth  stomach  is  of  a considerable  size,  but  a 
good  deal  less  than  either  the  first  or  second.  The  in- 
ternal  surface  is  regular  but  villous,  and  opens  on  its 
right  side  into  the  fifth  by  a round  opening  smaller  than 
the  entrance  from  the  third.  The  fifth  stomach  is  in 
the  piked  whale  round,  and  in  the  porpoise  oval ; it  is 
small,  and  terminates  in  the  pylorus,  which  has  little  of 
a valvular  appearance ; its  coats  are  thinner  than  those  of 
the  fourth,  having  an  even  inner  surface,  which  is  com- 
monly tinged  with  bile. 

The  duodenum  passes  down  on  the  right  side  very 
much  as  in  the  human  subject , excepting  that  it  is  more 
exposed,  from  the  colon  not  crossing  it.  It  lies  on  the 
right  kidney,  and  then  passes  to  the  left  side,  behind  the 
ascending  part  of  the  colon  and  root  of  the  mesentery, 
comes  out  on  the  left  side,  and  getting  on  the  edge  of 
the  mesentery  becomes  a loose  intestine  forming  the 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE® 


99 


jejunum.  In  this  course,  behind  the  mesentery,  it  is 
exposed  as  in  most  quadrupeds,  not  being  covered  by  it 
as  in  the  human.  The  jejunum  and  ilium  pass  along 
the  edge  of  the  mesentery  downwards  to  the  lower  part 
of  the  abdomen.  The  ilium,  near  the  lower  end,  makes 
a turn  towards  the  right  side,  and  then  mounting  upwards 
round  the  edge  of  the  mesentery  passes  a little  way  on 
the  right,  as  high  as  the  kidney,  and  there  enters  the 
colon  or  coecum.  The  c cecum  lies  on  the  lower  end  of 
the  kidney  considerably  higher  than  in  the  human  body, 
which  renders  the  ascending  part  of  the  colon  short. 

The  coecum  is  about  seven  inches  long,  and  more 
like  that  of  the  lion  or  seal  than  of  any  other  I know. 
The  colon  passes  obliquely  up  to  the  right  side,  a little 
towards  the  middle  of  the  abdomen,  and  when  as  high 
as  the  stomach  crosses  to  the  left,  and  acquires  a broad 
mesocolon.  At  this  part,  it  lies  upon  the  left  kidney, 
and  in  its  passage  down  gets  more  and  more  to  the 
middle  line  of  the  body.  When  it  has  reached  the  lower 
part  of  the  abdomen,  it  passes  behind  the  uterus  and 
along  with  the  vagina  in  the  female ; between  the  two  tes« 
tides,  and  behind  the  bladder  and  root  of  the  penis,  in 
the  male;  bending  down  to  open  on  what  is  called  the 
belly  of  the  animal,  and  in  its  whole  course  it  is  gently 
convoluted.  In  those  which  have  no  cm  cum,  and  there- 
fore  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  a colon,  the  intestine 
before  it  terminates  in  the  rectum  makes  the  same 
kind  of  sweep  round  the  other  intestines  as  the  colon 
does  where  there  is  a coecum.  The  intestines  are  not 
large  for  the  size  of  the  animal,  not  being  larger  in  those 


100 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


of  eighteen  or  twenty-four  feet  long  than  in  the  horse ; 
the  colon  not  much  more  capacious  than  the  jejunum 
and  ilium,  and  very  short,  a circumstance  common  to 
carnivorous  animals.  The  structure  of  the  inner  surface 
of  the  intestines  is  in  some  very  singular,  and  different 
from  that  of  the  others.  The  inner  surface  of  the  duo- 
denum in  the  piked  whale  is  thrown  into  longitudinal 
rugm  or  valves,  which  are  at  some  distance  from  each 
other,  and  these  receive  lateral  folds.  The  duodenum 
of  the  bottle-nose  swells  out  into  a large  cavity,  and 
might  almost  be  reckoned  an  eighth  stomach,  but  as 
the  gall  ducts  enter  it,  I shall  call  it  duodenum.  The 
inner  coat  of  the  jejunum  and  ilium  appears  in  irregu- 
lar folds,  which  may  vary  according  as  the  muscular 
coat  of  the  intestine  acts,  yet  I do  not  believe  that  their 
form  depends  entirely  on  that  circumstance,  as  they  run 
longitudinally,  and  take  a serpentine  course,  when  the 
gut  is  shortened  by  the  contraction  of  the  longitudinal 
muscular  fibres.  These  folds  in  the  bottle-nose  act 
almost  like  valves  when  anything  is  attempted  to  be 
passed  in  a contrary  direction.  They  begin  faintly  in 
the  duodenum,  before  it  makes  its  quick  turn  and  termi- 
nates in  the  anus.  The  colon  and  rectum  have  the 
rugse  very  flat,  which  seems  to  depend  entirely  on  the 
contraction  of  the  gut.  The  rectum,  near  the  anus, 
appears  for  four  or  five  inches  much  contracted,  is 
glandular,  covered  by  a soft  cuticle,  and  the  anus  small. 
I never  found  any  air  in  the  intestines  of  this  tribe,  nor 
indeed  in  any  of  the  aquatic  animals.  The  mesenteric 
artery  anastomoses  by  large  branches. 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


101 


Although  this  tribe  cannot  be  said  to  ruminate,  yet  in 
the  number  of  stomachs  they  come  nearest  to  that  order, 
but  here  I suspect  the  order  of  digestion  is  in  some 
degree  inverted.  In  both  the  ruminants  and  this  tribe, 
I think  it  must  be  allowed  that  the  first  stomach  must 
be  a reservoir.  In  the  ruminants,  the  precise  use  of 
the  second  and  third  stomachs  is  perhaps  not  known, 
but  digestion  is  certainly  carried  on  in  the  fourth,  while, 
in  this  tribe,  I imagine  that  digestion  is  performed  in 
the  second,  and  the  use  of  the  third  and  fourth  is  not 
exactly  known.  The  ccecum  and  colon  do  not  assist  in 
pointing  out  the  nature  of  the  food  and  mode  of  digestion 
in  this  tribe. 

The  porpoise,  which  has  teeth,  and  four  cavities  in  the 
stomach,  has  no  coecum  similar  to  some  land  animals, 
as  the  bear,  badger,  racoon,  ferret,  polecat,  etc. ; neither 
has  the  bottle-nose  a coecum,  which  has  only  two  small 
teeth  in  the  lower  jaw  ; and  the  piked  whale,  which  has 
no  teeth,  has  a coecum  almost  exactly  like  the  lion, 
v/hich  has  teeth  and  a very  different  kind  of  stomach. 
In  the  stomach  of  the  large  bottle-nose  I found  the 
beaks  of  some  hundreds  of  cuttle-fish  ; in  the  grampus 
I found  the  tail  of  a porpoise  ; in  the  stomach  of  the 
piked  whale  I found  the  bones  of  different  fish,  but  par- 
ticularly those  of  the  dog-fish.  From  the  size  of  the 
oesophagus  we  may  conclude  that  they  do  not  swallow 
fish  so  large  in  proportion  to  their  size  as  many  fish  do 
that  we  have  reason  to  believe  take  their  food  in  the 
same  way,  for  fish  often  attempt  to  swallow  what  is 
larger  than  their  stomachs  can  at  one  time  contain,  and 


102 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


part  remains  in  the  oesophagus  till  the  rest  is  digested* 
The  epiploon,  on  the  whole,  is  a thin  membrane  ; on  the 
right  side  it  is  rather  a thin  net- work,  though  on  the  left 
it  is  a complete  membrane,  and  near  to  the  stomach  of 
the  same  side  becomes  of  a considerable  thickness,  espe- 
cially between  the  two  first  bags  of  the  stomach.  It  has 
little  or  no  fat,  except  what  slightly  covers  the  vessels 
in  particular  parts/’ 


OF  THE  LIVER,  PANCREAS^  AND  SPLEEN. 

There  is  a considerable  degree  of  uniformity  in  the 
liver  of  this  tribe  of  animals.  In  shape  it  nearly  resem- 
bles the  human , but  is  not  so  thick  at  the  base  nor  so 
sharp  at  the  lower  edge,  and  is  probably  not  so  firm  in 
its  texture. 

The  liver,  towards  the  left,  is  very  much  attached  to 
the  stomach,  the  little  epiploon  being  a thick  substance. 
There  is  no  gall  bladder ; the  hepatic  duct  is  large,  and 
enters  the  duodenum  about  seven  inches  beyond  the 
pylorus® 

The  pancreas  is  a very  long  flat  body,  having  its 
left  end  attached  to  the  right  side  of  the  first  cavity  of 
the  stomach.  It  passes  across  the  spine  at  the  root  of 
the  mesentery  and  near  to  the  pylorus,  joins  the  hollow 
curve  of  the  duodenum,  along  which  it  is  continued,  and 
adheres  to  that  intestine,  its  duct  entering  that  of  the 
liver  near  the  termination  in  the  gut.  The  spleen  is 
involved  in  the  epiploon,  and  is  very  small  for  the  size 
of  the  animal.” 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE®  103 

OF  THE  KIDNEYS,  BLADDER,  AND  RENAL  CAPSULES® 

“ The  kidneys,  in  the  whole  of  this  tribe,  are  conglo- 
merated, being  made  up  of  small  parts,  which  are  only 
connected  by  cellular  membrane,  blood-vessels,  and 
ducts,  or  infundibula,  but  not  partially  connected  by 
continuity  of  substance,  as  in  the  human  body,  the  ox, 
etc.  The  whole  kidney  is  an  oblong  flat  body,  broader 
and  thicker  at  the  upper  end  than  the  lower.  The  ureter 
comes  out  at  the  lower  end  and  passes  along  to  the 
bladder,  which  it  enters  very  near  the  urethra. 

The  bladder  is  oblong,  and  small  for  the  size  of  the 
animal.  In  the  female  the  urethra  passes  along  to  the 
external  sulcus  or  vulva,  and  opens  just  under  the 
clitoris,  much  as  in  the  human  subject.  The  capsulce 
renales  are  small  for  the  size  of  the  animal  when  com- 
pared to  the  human,  as  indeed  they  are  in  most  animals ; 
they  are  flat,  and  of  an  oval  figure. 

OF  THE  BLOOD. 

“ The  blood  of  animals  of  this  order  is,  I believe,  similar 
to  that  of  quadrupeds,  but  I have  no  idea  that  the  red 
globules  are  in  larger  proportion.  I will  not  pretend 
how  far  this  may  assist  in  keeping  up  animal  heat,  but 
as  these  animals  may  be  said  to  live  in  a very  cold 
climate,  or  atmosphere,  and  such  as  readily  carries  off 
heat  from  the  body,  they  may  want  some  help  of  this 
kind.  It  is  certain  that  the  quantity  of  blood  in  this 
tribe,  and  in  the  seal,  is  comparatively  larger  than  in  the 


104 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


quadruped,  and  therefore  probably  amounts  to  more  than 
that  of  any  known  animal/3  The  temperature  of  the 
blood  in  this  order  of  animals,  according  to  M . Desmou- 
lins, rises  as  high  as  104 ° .—Diet.  Class . dfHist . Nat. 


OF  THE  HEART  AND  ARTERIES. 

“ In  our  examination  of  particular  parts,  the  size  of 
which  is  generally  regulated  by  that  of  the  whole  animal, 
if  we  have  only  been  accustomed  to  see  them  in  those 
which  are  small  or  middle-sized,  we  behold  them  with 
astonishment  in  animals  so  far  exceeding  the  common 
bulk  as  the  whale.  Thus  the  heart  and  aorta  of  the 
spermaceti  whale  appeared  prodigious,  being  too  large  to 
be  contained  in  a wide  tub,  the  aorta  measuring  a foot 
in  diameter.  When  we  consider  these  as  applied  to  the 
circulation,  and  figure  to  ourselves  that  probably  ten  or 
fifteen  gallons  of  blood  are  thrown  out  at  one  stroke,  and 
moved  with  an  immense  velocity  through  a tube  of  a 
foot  in  diameter,  the  whole  idea  fills  the  mind  with 
wonder.” 

u The  diameter  of  the  aorta”  of  the  sperm  whale,  that 
was  thrown  on  the  coast  of  Yorkshire,  says  Alderson, 
u was  12|-  inches;  thickness  of  the  coat  of  the  artery 
ffr  of  an  inch.  In  the  sinus  behind  the  valves  the  thick- 
ness  was  not  greater  than  that  of  the  pulmonary  artery. 
Length  of  the  heart,  from  the  apex  to  the  valves  of  the 
aorta,  3 feet  10  inches.  The  columnse  carneae  were  very 
large,  and  one  of  the  cordae  ten  din ae,  in  the  tricuspid 
valve,  measured  7 inches  in  length.  Near  the  middle  of 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


105 


the  left  ventricle  the  wall  of  the  ventricle  measured  about 
5 inches.  The  diameter  of  the  coronary  artery  was  l|- 
inches.  On  the  left  ventricle  being  laid  open,  its  capacity 
was  guessed  by  some  farming  gentleman  present  to  con- 
tain from  eight  to  ten  gallons ! The  heart  was  destitute 
of  fat^—Camb.  Philosophy  Trans . 

6 6 The  general  structure  of  the  arteries^  says  Hunter, 
“ resembles  that  of  other  animals— and  where  parts  are 
nearly  similar,  the  distribution  is  likewise  similar.  The 
aorta  forms  its  usual  curve,  and  sends  off  the  carotid  and 
subclavian  arteries^—animals  of  this  tribe,  as  has  been 
observed,  have  a greater  proportion  of  blood  than  any 
other  known,  and  there  are  many  arteries  apparently 
intended  as  reservoirs,  where  a larger  quantity  of  arterial 
blood  seemed  to  be  required  in  a part,  and  vascularity 
could  not  be  the  only  object.  Thus  we  find  that  the 
intercostal  arteries  divide  into  a vast  number  of  branches, 
which  run  in  a serpentine  course  between  the  pleurae 
ribs  and  their  muscles,  making  a thick  substance  some- 
what similar  to  that  formed  by  the  spermatic  artery  in 
the  bulk 

These  vessels,  everywhere  lining  the  sides  of  the 
thorax,  pass  in  between  the  ribs  near  their  articulation, 
and  also  behind  the  ligamentous  attachments  of  the  ribs, 
and  anastomose  with  each  other.  The  medulla  spinalis 
is  surrounded  with  a net-work  of  arteries  in  the  same 
manner,  more  especially  where  it  comes  out  from  the 
brain,  where  a thick  substance  is  formed  by  their  rami- 
fications and  convolutions,  and  these  vessels  most  pro- 
bably anastomose  with  those  of  the  thorax.5’ 

f 2 


106 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


This  rete  mirabile , as  it  has  been  termed  by  Mr, 
Owen,  has,  since  the  time  of  Hunter,  been  noticed  by 
Drs.  Barclay  and  Knox,  and  by  Desmoulins  and 
Breschet,  in  France ; but  the  use  of  this  remarkable 
structure  has  not  yet  been  clearly  ascertained,  although 
Sir  William  Jardine,  in  the  Nat,  Lib.  vol.  vL  p.  50, 
has  with  “ considerable  hesitation  55  attempted  the  ex- 
planation of  this  ({  extraordinary  phenomenon.55 

“ No  circumstance,”  he  remarks,  “ connected  with 
the  economy  of  whales,  is  more  extraordinary  than  the 
long  period  during  which  they  can  suspend  the  vital 
function  of  respiration .5? 

Respiration  is  in  a great  degree  subservient  to  the 
circulation  of  the  blood ; the  stimulus  to  inspiration  is 
the  accumulation  of  this  fluid  in  the  lungs,  which  when 
purified  proceeds  to  the  heart,  whence  it  is  propelled 
through  the  frame  for  the  purposes  of  secretion,  etc. ; 
after  which  it  is  again  received  into  the  veins,  where  it 
assumes  its  venous  aspect,  and  is  deprived  of  its  arterial 
character.  The  circle  thus  described  in  man  and  the 
mammalia  generally,  is,  so  to  speak,  continuous  and 
simple.  In  the  cetacea,  however,  it  is  not  so  ; for  in 
them  the  arterial  portion,  insteadjof  being  a simple  and 
direct  course  to  the  venous,  is  complicated  by  the 
addition  of  a structure  which  we  believe  is  peculiar  to 
this  order,  and  which  is  nothing  less  than  a grand 
reservoir  for  the  reception  of  a great  quantity  of  arterial 
blood,  which,  as  occasion  requires,  is  emptied  into  the 
general  circulation,  and  thus  for  a time  at  least  super- 
sedes the  necessity  of  respiration.55 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE* 


107 


OF  THE  LARYNX. 

i(  The  larynx  in  most  animals  living  on  land  is  a com- 
pound organ,  adapted  both  for  respiration,  deglutition, 
and  sound,  which  last  is  produced  in  the  action  of 
respiration ; but  in  this  tribe,  the  larynx  I suppose  is 
only  adapted  to  respiration,  as  we  do  not  know  that 
they  have  any  mode  of  producing  sound.  It  is  com- 
posed of  os  hyoides,  thyroid,  cricoid,  and  two  arytsenoid 
cartilages,  with  the  epiglottis.  It  varies  much  in  struc- 
ture and  size,  when  compared  in  animals  of  different 
genera.  Those  cartilages  were  much  smaller  in  the 
bottle-nose  of  twenty-four  feet  long,  than  in  the  piked 
whale  of  seventeen  feet ; while  the  os  hyoides  was  much 
larger— I could  not  observe  anything  like  a thyroid 
gland.” 


OF  THE  LUNGS. 

“ The  lungs  are  two  oblong  bodies,  one  on  each  side  of 
the  chest,  and  are  not  divided  into  smaller  lobes  as  in 
the  human  subject.  They  are  of  considerable  length, 
but  not  so  deep  between  the  fore  and  back  part  as  in 
the  quadruped,  from  the  heart  being  broad,  flat,  and  of 
itself  filling  up  the  fore  part  of  the  chest.  They  pass 
further  down  on  the  back  part  than  in  the  quadruped, 
by  which  their  size  is  increased,  and  rise  higher  up  in 
the  chest  than  the  entrance  of  the  vessels,  coming  to  a 
point  at  the  upper  end. 

From  the  entrance  of  the  vessels,  they  are  connected 
downwards  along  their  whole  inner  edge  by  a strong 


108 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


attachment  (in  which  there  are  some  lymphatic  glands) 
to  the  posterior  mediastinum.  The  lungs  are  extremely 
elastic  in  their  substance,  even  so  much  as  to  squeeze 
out  any  air  that  may  be  thrown  into  them,  and  to 
become  almost  at  once  a solid  mass,  having  a good  deal 
the  appearance,  consistence,  and  feel  of  an  ox’s  spleen. 
The  branches  of  the  bronchise,  which  ramify  into  the 
lungs,  have  not  the  cartilages  flat,  but  rather  rounded  ; 
a construction  which  admits  of  greater  motion  between 
them.  The  pulmonary  cells  are  smaller  than  in  quad- 
rupeds, which  make  less  air  necessary,  and  they  com- 
municate with  each  other,  which  those  of  the  quadruped 
do  not,  for  by  blowing  into  one  branch  of  the  trachea, 
not  only  the  part  to  wdiich  it  immediately  goes  but  the 
whole  lungs  are  filled.  As  the  ribs  in  this  tribe  do  not 
completely  make  the  cavity  of  the  thorax,  the  diaphragm 
has  not  the  same  attachments  as  in  the  quadruped  ; but 
is  connected  forwards  to  the  abdominal  muscles,  which 
are  very  strong,  being  a mixture  of  muscular  and 
tendinous  fibres.  The  position  of  the  diaphragm  is  less 
transverse  than  in  the  quadruped,  passing  more  obliquely 
backwards,  and  coming  very  low  on  the  spine,  and 
higher  up  before,  which  makes  the  chest  largest  in  the 
direction  of  the  animal  at  the  back,  and  gives  room  for 
the  lungs  to  be  continued  along  the  spine.  The  parts 
immediately  concerned  in  inspiration  are  extremely 
strong,  the  diaphragm  remarkably  so.  The  reason  of 
this  must  at  once  appear,  it  necessarily  requiring  great 
force  to  expand  the  chest  in  a dense  medium  like  water, 
especially  too  when  the  vacuity  is  to  be  filled  up  with 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


109 


one  that  is  rarer,  and  is  to  water  a species  of  vacuum, 
the  pressure  being  much  greater  on  the  external  surface 
than  the  counter  pressure  from  within.  But  expiration 
on  the  other  hand  must  be  much  more  easily  per- 
formed,5 ? 


OF  THE  BLOW-HOLE  OR  PASSAGE  FOR  THE  AIR, 

66  As  the  nose  in  every  animal  that  breathes  air  is  a com- 
mon passage  for  the  air,  and  is  also  the  organ  of  smelling, 
I shall  describe  it  in  this  tribe  as  instrumental  to  these 
purposes.  The  membranous  portion  of  the  posterior 
nostril  is  one  canal,  but  when  in  the  bony  part,  in  most 
of  them  it  is  divided  into  two.  The  spermaceti  whale, 
however,  is  an  exception.  At  its  beginning  in  the 
fauces  it  is  a roundish  hole,  surrounded  by  a strong 
sphincter  muscle,  for  grasping  the  epiglottis.  In  the 
spermaceti  whale,  which  has  a single  canal,  it  is  thrown 
a little  to  the  left  side.  This  opening  forms  a passage 
for  the  air  to  and  from  the  lungs,  for  it  would  be  impos- 
sible for  these  animals  to  breathe  through  the  mouth ; 
indeed,  I believe  the  human  species  alone  breathe  by 
the  mouth,  and  in  them  it  appears  mostly  from  habit, 
for  in  quadrupeds  the  epiglottis  conducts  the  air  through 
the  nose. 

In  the  whole  of  this  tribe  the  situation  of  the  opening 
on  the  upper  surface  of  the  head  is  well  adapted  for  this 
purpose,  being  the  first  part  that  comes  to  the  surface  of 
the  water ; in  the  natural  progressive  motion  of  the 
animal,  therefore,  it  is  to  be  considered  principally  as 


no 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


a respiratory  organ,  and  when  it  contains  the  organ  of 
smell  (as  in  the  whalebone  whales),  that  is  only  se- 
condary. As  the  animals  of  this  order  do  not  live  in  the 
medium  which  they  inspire,  the  organs  conducting  the 
air  to  the  lungs  are,  in  some  sort,  particularly  constructed, 
that  the  water  in  which  they  live  may  not  interfere  with 
the  air  they  breathe.  The  beginning  of  the  posterior 
nostril,  which  answers  to  the  palatum  molle  in  the  quad- 
ruped,  having  a sphincter,  the  glottis  is  grasped  by  it, 
which  renders  its  situation  still  more  secure,  and  the 
passages  through  the  head , across  the  fauces , and  along 
the  trachea , are  rendered  one  continued  canal . 

This  union  of  glottis  and  epiglottis  with  the  posterior 
nostril,  making  only  a kind  of  joint , admits  of  motion 
and  of  dilatation  and  contraction  of  the  fauces  in  deglu- 
tition , from  the  epiglottis  moving  in  or  out  of  the  poste- 
rior nostril.  This  construction  of  parts  answers  a 
purpose  similar  to  that  of  the  epiglottis  in  the  quadru- 
ped; it  may  be  considered  as  the  epiglottis  and  the 
arytasnoid  cartilages  joining  to  make  a tubular  or  cylin- 
drical epiglottis,  instead  of  a valvular  one.  The  reason 
why  there  should  be  so  peculiar  a construction  of  parts 
does  not  at  first  appear,  but  we  certainly  see  by  it  an 
absolute  guard  placed  upon  the  lungs,  that  no  water 
should  get  into  them 


OF  THE  BRAIN. 

“ The  size  of  the  brain  differs  much  in  different  genera 
of  this  tribe,  and  likewise  in  the  proportion  it  bears  to 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


Ill 


the  bulk  of  the  animal.  In  the  porpoise  I believe  it  is 
the  largest,  and,  perhaps,  in  that  respect  comes  nearer 
to  the  human.  The  size  of  the  cerebellum  in  propor- 
tion to  that  of  the  cerebrum,  is  smaller  in  the  human 
subject  than  in  any  animal  with  which  I am  acquainted. 
In  many  quadrupeds,  as  the  horse,  cow,  etc.,  the  dispro- 
portion in  size  between  the  cerebellum  and  cerebrum  is 
not  great,  and  in  this  tribe  it  is  still  less,  yet  not  so 
small  as  in  the  bird,  etc.  The  whole  brain  in  this  tribe 
is  compact,  the  anterior  part  of  the  cerebrum  not  pro- 
jecting so  far  forward  as  in  either  the  quadruped  or 
human  subject,  neither  is  the  medulla  oblongata  so  pro- 
minent, but  flat,  lying  in  a kind  of  hollow,  made  by  the 
two  lobes  of  the  cerebellum.  The  brain  is  composed  of 
cortical  and  medullary  substances  very  distinctly  marked, 
the  cortical  being  in  colour  like  the  tubular  substance  of 
a kidney,  the  medullary  very  white.  These  substances 
are  nearly  in  the  same  proportion  as  in  the  human 
brain.  The  two  lateral  ventricles  are  large,  and  in  those 
that  have  olfactory  nerves  are  not  continued  into  them 
as  in  many  quadrupeds,  nor  do  they  wind  so  much  out- 
wards as  in  the  human  subject,  but  pass  close  round  the 
posterior  ends  of  the  tlialami  nervorum  opticorum.  The 
thalami  themselves  are  large.  The  corpora  stiata  small, 
the  crurse  of  the  fornix  are  continued  along  the  winding 
of  the  ventricles  much  as  in  the  human  subject.  The 
plexus  choroides  is  attached  to  a strong  membrane,  which 
covers  the  thalami  nervorum  opticorum,  and  passes 
through  the  whole  course  of  the  ventricle,  much  as  in 
the  human  subject. 


112 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


The  substance  of  the  brain  is  more  visibly  fibrous  than 
I ever  saw  it  in  any  other  animal,  the  fibres  passing 
from  the  ventricles  as  from  a centre  to  the  circumference, 
which  fibrous  texture  is  also  continued  through  the 
cortical  substance.  The  nerves  going  out  from  the 
brain  I believe  are  similar  to  those  of  the  quadruped, 
except  in  those  which  want  the  olfactory  nerves.  The 
medulla  spinalis  is  much  smaller  in  proportion  to  the 
size  of  the  body  than  in  the  human  species,  but  still 
bears  some  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  brain,  for  in 
the  porpoise  where  the  brain  is  largest,  the  medulla 
spinalis  is  largest,  yet  this  did  not  hold  good  in  the 
spermaceti  whale , the  size  of  the  medulla  spinalis  appear- 
ing to  be  proportionally  larger  than  the  brain,  which 
was  small  when  compared  to  the  size  of  the  animal.  It 
has  a cortical  part  in  the  centre,  and  terminates  about 
the  twenty-fifth  vertebra,  beyond  which  is  the  cauda 
equina,  the  dura-mater  going  no  lower.  The  nerves 
which  go  off  from  the  medulla  spinalis,  are  more  uni- 
form in  size  than  in  the  quadruped,  there  being  no  such 
inequality  of  parts,  nor  any  extremities  to  be  supplied 
except  the  fins.  The  medulla  spinalis  is  more  fibrous 
in  its  structure  than  in  any  other  animal,  and  when  an 
attempt  is  made  to  break  it  longitudinally,  it  tears  with 
a fibrous  appearance,  but  transversely  it  breaks  irregu- 
larly. The  dura-mater  lines  the  skull,  and  forms  in 
some  the  three  processes,  answerable  to  the  division  of 
the  brain  as  in  the  human  subject,  but  in  others  this  is 
bone.  Where  it  covers  the  medulla  spinalis,  it  differs 
from  all  the  quadrupeds  I am  acquainted  with,  enclosing 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


113 


the  medulla  closely,  and  the  nerves  immediately  passing 
out  through  it  at  the  lower  part  as  they  do  at  the  upper, 
so  that  the  cauda  equina  as  it  forms  is  on  the  outside 
of  the  dura-mater.” 

“ It  would  appear,”  says  Sir  W.  Jardine,  athat  the 
larger  varieties  have  very  small  brains  in  proportion  to 
the  size  of  their  bodies,  whilst  the  smaller  kinds  again 
have  very  large  and  well-developed  brains.” 

This  observation,  strengthened  as  it  is  by  the  state- 
ments of  many  celebrated  naturalists,  merely  serves  to 
corroborate  the  faithful  and  original  descriptions  of 
Hunter.  Mr.  Scoresby  states  that  in  a young  specimen 
of  the  Greenland  whale  which  measured  eighteen  feet  in 
length,  and  weighed  11,200  pounds,  the  brain  weighed 
only  three  pounds  twelve  ounces,  which  is  only  a three- 
thousandth  part  of  the  weight  of  the  animal,  wdiilst  in 
man  it  weighs  a thirty-fifth  part.  In  a young  rostrata 
seventeen  feet  long,  Mr.  Hunter  found  that  the  brain 
weighed  only  four  pounds  eight  ounces.  And  Del  a- 
lande  states  that  in  a rorqual  eighty  feet  in  length,  the 
cranial  cavity  only  measured  thirteen  inches  by  nine ; 
whilst  Cuvier,  in  five  examinations  of  the  smaller  genera 
of  this  order  of  animals,  states  that  in  the  dolphin  and 
porpoise,  the  brain  weighed  one  thirty-sixth  of  the  whole. 

The  cranial  cavity  for  the  brain  in  the  large  male 
spermaceti  whale  which  I examined  myself  at  Burton- 
Constable,  only  measured  in  width  about  fourteen  inches, 
in  length  ten  inches,  and  in  depth  nine  inches. 

The  spinal  canal  for  the  reception  of  the  medulla 
spinalis  wras,  however,  very  large  in  proportion  to  the 


114 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


brain,  the  particulars  of  which  are  given  with  the  de- 
scription of  the  skeleton . 


OF  THE  SENSE  OF  TOUCH. 

“ The  cutis  in  this  tribe,”  says  Hunter,  “ appears  in 
general  particularly  well  calculated  for  sensation,  the 
whole  surface  being  covered  with  villi,  which  are  so 
many  vessels,  and  we  must  suppose  nerves.  Whether 
this  structure  is  only  necessary  for  acute  sensation,  or 
whether  it  is  necessary  for  common  sensation  where  the 
cuticle  is  thick  and  consisting  of  many  layers,  I do  not 
know.  We  may  observe  that  where  it  is  necessary  the 
sense  of  touch  should  be  accurate,  the  villi  are  usually 
thick  and  long,  which  probably  is  necessary,  because  in 
most  parts  of  the  body  where  the  more  acute  sensations 
of  touch  are  required,  such  parts  are  covered  by  a thick 
cuticle,  of  this  the  ends  of  our  fingers,  toes,  and  the 
foot  of  the  hoofed  animals  are  remarkable  examples. 
Whether  this  sense  is  more  acute  in  water,  I am  not 
certain,  but  should  imagine  it  is.” 


OF  THE  EAR. 

“ This  organ  consists  of  the  same  parts  as  in  the  quad- 
ruped, an  external  opening,  with  membrani  tympani, 
an  Eustachian  tube,  a tympanum  with  its  processes,  and 
the  small  bones.  There  is  no  external  projection  form- 
ing a funnel ; we  can  easily  assign  a reason  why  there 
should  be  no  projecting  ear,  as  it  would  interfere  with 
progressive  motion,  but  the  reason  why  it  is  not  formed 
as  in  birds  is  not  so  evident.  The  external  opening 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


115 


begins  by  a small  hole  scarcely  perceptible,  situated  on 
the  side  of  the  head  a little  behind  the  eye ; it  is  much 
longer  than  in  other  animals,  in  consequence  of  the  size 
of  the  head  being  so  much  increased  beyond  the  cavity 
which  contains  the  brain.  The  Eustachian  tube  opens  on 
the  outside  of  the  upper  part  of  the  fauces.  The  bony 
part  of  the  organ  is  very  hard  and  brittle,  rendering  it 
difficult  to  be  cut  with  a saw  without  its  chipping  into 
pieces,  and  there  is  on  the  whole  more  solid  bone  than 
in  the  corresponding  parts  in  quadrupeds,  it  being  thick 
and  massy.” 

“ I am  not  aware,  however,  that  any  other  beside  the 
sperm  whale  has  any  external  auricular  opening.  For 
in  the  beluga,  examined  by  Dr.  Barclay  (according  to 
the  Naturalist's  Library,  vol.  vi.  p.  71),  no  external 
opening  could  be  discovered,  nor  was  any  discovered  by 
Blainville  in  the  toothless  whale  of  Havre,  nor  in  any  of 
the  seventy  globiceps  which  were  stranded  in  Brittany 
in  1812,  nor  in  a rorqual , fifty-eight  feet  long,  examined 
by  M.  Souty;  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  a narwhal 
and  dolphin  we  have  had  an  opportunity  of  examining.” 

Dr.  Alderson  has  remarked  of  the  sperm  whale,  that 
“ there  was  no  external  ear,  but  simply  a small  circu- 
lar opening,  about  nine  inches,  posteriorly  to  the  poste- 
rior canthus  of  the  eye,  which  just  admitted  the  finger.” 
— Camb,  Philos . Trans . 


OF  THE  EYE. 

“ The  eye  in  this  tribe  of  animals  is  constructed  upon 
nearly  the  same  principle  as  that  of  quadrupeds,  differing 


116 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


however  in  some  circumstances,  by  which  it  is  probably 
better  adapted  to  see  in  the  medium  through  which  the 
light  is  to  pass.  It  is  upon  the  whole  small  for  the  size 
of  the  animal,  which  would  lead  to  the  supposition  that 
their  locomotion  is  not  great ; for  I believe  animals  that 
swim  are  in  this  respect  similar  to  those  that  fly  ; and  as 
this  tribe  come  to  the  surface  of  the  medium  in  which 
they  live,  they  may  be  considered  in  the  same  view  with 
birds  which  soar,  and  we  find  birds  that  fly  to  great 
heights  and  move  through  a considerable  space  in  search  - 
of  food,  have  their  eyes  larger  in  proportion  to  their  size. 

The  eyelids  have  but  little  motion,  and  do  not  consist 
©f  loose  cellular  membrane  as  in  quadrupeds,  but  rather 
of  the  common  adipose  membrane  of  the  body.  The 
tunica  conjunctiva,  where  it  is  reflected  from  the  eyelid 
to  the  eyeball,  is  perforated  all  round  by  small  orifices 
of  the  ducts  of  a circle  of  glandular  bodies  lying  behind 
it,  and  the  secretion  from  them  all  I believe  to  be  a 
mucus  similar  to  what  is  found  in  the  turtle  and  croco- 
dile : there  are  neither  puncta  nor  lachrymal  ducts,  so 
that  the  secretion,  whatever  it  be,  is  washed  off  in  the 
water.  The  muscles  which  open  the  eyelids  are  very 
strong ; they  take  their  origin  from  the  head,  round  the 
optic  nerve,  which  in  some  requires  their  being  very 
long,  and  are  so  broad  as  almost  to  make  a circular  mass 
round  the  whole  of  the  interior  straight  muscle  of  the  eye 
itself.  They  may  be  divided  into  four : a superior,  an 
inferior,  and  one  at  each  angle ; as  they  pass  outwards 
to  the  eyelids  they  diverge  and  become  broader,  and  are 
inserted  into  the  inside  of  the  eyelids  almost  equally  all 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


117 


round.  They  may  be  termed  the  dilatores  of  the  eyelids, 
and  before  they  reach  their  insertion  give  off  the  external 
straight  muscles,  which  are  small  and  inserted  into 
the  sclerotic  coat  before  the  transverse  axis  of  the  eye ; 
these  may  be  named  the  elevator,  depressor,  adductor, 
and  abductor,  and  they  may  be  dissected  away  from  the 
others  as  distinct  muscles.  Besides  these  four,  going 
from  the  muscles  of  the  eyelids  to  the  eye  itself,  there 
are  two  which  are  larger  and  enclose  the  optic  nerve 
with  the  plexus.  As  these  pass  outwards  they  become 
broad — may  in  some  be  divided  into  four— and  are 
inserted  into  the  sclerotic  coat  almost  all  round  the  eye, 
rather  behind  its  transverse  axis.  The  two  oblique 
muscles  are  very  long ; they  pass  through  the  muscles  of 
the  eyelids,  are  continued  on  to  the  globe  of  the  eye 
between  the  two  sets  of  straight  muscles,  and  at  their 
insertion  are  very  broad,  a circumstance  which  gives  great 
variation  to  the  motion  of  the  eye.  The  sclerotic  coat 
gives  shape  to  the  eye  both  externally  and  internally  as 
in  other  animals ; but  the  external  shape  and  that  of 
the  internal  cavity  are  very  dissimilar,  arising  from  the 
great  difference  in  the  thickness  of  this  coat  in  different 
parts.  The  external  figure  is  round,  except  that  it  is  a 
little  flattened  forwards ; but  that  of  the  cavity  is  far 
otherwise,  being  made  up  of  sections  of  various  circles, 
being  a little  lengthened  from  the  inner  side  to  the 
outer— a transverse  section  making  a short  ellipsis.  In 
the  piked  whale  the  long  axis  is  two  inches  and  three 
quarters— the  short  axis  is  two  inches  and  one  eighth. 
The  sclerotic  coat  becomes  thinner  as  it  approaches  to 


anatomy  and  physiology 


its  union  with  the  cornea,  where  it  is  thin  and  soft.  It 
is  extremely  firm  in  its  texture  where  thick,  and  from  a 
transverse  section  would  seem  to  be  composed  of  ten- 
dinous fibres,  intermixed  with  something  like  cartilage ; 
in  this  section  four  passages  for  vessels  remain  open. 
This  firmness  of  texture  precludes  all  effect  of  the 
straight  muscles  on  the  globe  of  the  eye  by  altering  its 
shape  and  adapting  its  focus  to  different  distances  of 
objects,  as  has  been  supposed  to  be  the  case  in  the  human 
eye.  The  cornea  makes  rather  a longer  ellipsis  than  the 
bail  of  the  eye,  the  sides  of  which  are  not  equally  curved, 
the  upper  being  most  considerably  so.  It  is  a segment 
of  a circle  somewhat  smaller  than  that  of  the  eyeball— 
is  soft  and  very  flaccid.  The  tunica  choroides  resembles 
that  of  the  quadruped,  and  its  inner  surface  is  of  a silver 
hue,  without  any  nigrum  pigmentum.  The  nigrum  pig- 
mentum  only  covers  the  ciliary  processes,  and  lines  the 
inside  of  the  iris.  The  retina  appears  to  be  nearly 
similar  to  that  of  the  quadruped.  The  arteries  going  to 
the  coats  of  the  eye  form  a plexus  passing  round  the 
optic  nerve,  resembling  in  its  appearance  that  of  the 
spermatic  artery  in  the  bull  and  some  other  animals. 
The  crystalline  humour  resembles  that  of  the  quadruped, 
but  whether  it  is  very  convex  or  flattened  I cannot 
determine,  those  I have  examined  having  been  kept  too 
long  to  preserve  their  exact  shape  and  size.  The  vitreous 
humour  adhered  to  the  retina  at  the  entrance  of  the 
optic  nerve.  The  optic  nerve  is  very  long  in  some 
species,  owing  to  the  vast  width  of  the  head.” 

In  the  sperm  whale  examined  by  Dr.  Alderson  “ the 


i 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


eye  was  placed  at  nearly  the  greatest  lateral  projection* 
a little  inferiorly ; the  eyelids  were  formed  of  a duplica- 
ture  of  the  outer  covering,  about  an  inch  in  thickness* 
the  upper  lid  projecting  like  a dap,  and  the  opening  was 
about  seven  inches  in  length.” 

Mr.  F.  D.  Bennett,  in  a paper  read  before  the  Zoo- 
logical Society,  December  13,  1836,  gave  the  following 
account  of  the  eye  of  the  sperm  whale  : 

“The  eye  of  the  cachalot,”  said  he,  “is  small  and 
placed  far  back  on  the  head,  above  and  between  the 
pectoral  fin  and  angle  of  the  lower  jaw.  Its  situation  is 
chiefly  marked  by  a raised  portion  of  integument  around 
it.  The  aperture  for  vision  does  not  exceed  two  inches 
in  the  longitudinal  and  one  inch  in  the  vertical  direction. 
The  eyelids  are  without  cilia  and  tarsal  cartilages ; they 
are  composed  of  two  horizontal  bands  of  integument, 
each  (in  the  example  from  which  I describe— viz.  a half- 
grown  male)  two  inches  in  depth,  and  connected  with 
each  other  at  the  inner  and  outer  canthus.  Between  each 
of  the  eyelids  and  the  blubber  exists  a distinct  line  of 
separation,  marked  by  a somewhat  deep  groove,  having 
a duplicature  of  thin  membrane,  serving  as  a surface  or 
hinge  on  which  the  lids  move.  At  these  lines  of  de- 
marcation all  integument  partaking  of  the  nature  of  fat 
ceases,  and  the  texture  of  the  tarsi  thus  insulated  is 
composed  solely  of  common  skin  and  cellular  and  other 
membranes,  together  with  a dense  layer  of  muscular 
fibres  deposited  in  its  centre.  The  conjunctiva  of  the 
lids  is  highly  vascular,  injected  with  blood,  and  covered 
with  orifices  of  mucous  ducts.  At  the  inner  canthus  of 


120 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


the  eye  it  forms  a thick  duplicature,  of  crescentic  form, 
constituting  a rudimental  third  eyelid,  not  unlike  the  haw 
of  the  horse.  The  globe  of  the  eye  is  chiefly  lodged  in 
the  soft  parts,  but  little  if  any  of  its  substance  entering 
the  bony  orbit.  It  is  deeply  set  within  the  lids,  and 
does  not  in  size  much  exceed  that  of  an  ox.  Its  size  in 
an  adult  female  was  cl\  inches  in  the  longitudinal,  and 
the  same  in  the  vertical  direction.  The  interior,  or 
cavity,  was  l\  inch  in  each  of  the  last-named  directions, 
and  its  depth  two -thirds  of  an  inch  only. 

“ The  globe  at  its  greatest  circumference  was  7|  inches : 
the  transparent  cornea,  at  its  transverse  or  broadest  dia» 
meter,  measured  1 inch,  and  in  its  vertical  or  narrow- 
est, three-fourths  of  an  inch.  The  muscles  of  the  globe 
formed  a dense  mass  surrounding  the  sheath  of  the  optic 
nerve,  and  were  inserted  in  one  continuous  line  over  the 
circumference  of  the  globe  at  its  greatest  convexity. 

“ The  optic  nerve  before  penetrating  the  sclerotic  is 
continued  to  some  length.  It  does  not  exceed  the  cir- 
cumference of  a crow’s  quill,  but  is  surrounded  by  a 
dense  fibrous  sheath  nearly  4 inches  in  diameter,  and 
which,  where  the  nerve  perforates  the  globe,  terminates 
on  the  posterior  surface  of  the  latter.  Around  the  globe 
and  its  muscles  much  cellular  tissue  and  true  fat  are 
deposited.  The  eyeball  in  shape  is  not  a perfect  sphere ; 
"its  anterior  and  posterior  surfaces  are  flattened : that 
portion  of  the  conjunctiva  of  the  globe  immediately  sur- 
rounding the  cornea,  and  the  only  portion  exposed  be- 
tween the  aperture  of  the  lids,  is  of  an  intense  black  hue. 
It  is  possible  this  dark  portion  may  be  a membrane  dis- 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


121 


tinct  from  the  conjunctiva,  since  around  the  extent  it 
occupies  it  terminates  by  an  irregular  margin,  and  is 
capable  of  being  detached  from  the  conjunctiva,  when  it 
presents  the  form  of  a delicate  layer  of  cuticle,  with  a 
black  pigment  deposited  beneath  its  surface.* 

“ The  cornea  of  the  cachalot  is  dense,  and  composed  of 

many  layers  ; when  divided,  a small  quantity  of  limpid 

aqueous  humour  flows  forth : the  anterior  chamber  of  the 

eye  is  very  limited,  and  the  crystalline  lens  projects  into 

it  through  the  pupillary  aperture.  The  iris  is  a coarse 

membrane  of  a dull-brown  colour,  with  a narrow  zone  of 

lighter  hue  surrounding  its  outer  margin.  Its  inner  and 

free  margin  is  very  thin,  and  embraces  the  protruding 

convexity  of  the  lens. 

* 

“ The  lens  is  small,  certainly  not  exceeding  in  size 
that  of  the  human  eye:  it  forms  nearly  a perfect  sphere: 
the  vitreous  humour  tolerably  abundant.  The  retina 
was  spread  with  beautifully  delicate  arborescent  vesselsj 
and  afforded  a small  bright  spot  at  the  insertion  of  the 
optic  nerve.  Beneath  the  retina  was  spread  a tapetum 
of  dense  membranous  texture  and  yellow-green  or  erugo- 
green  colour.  The  sclerotic  at  its  posterior  third  is  thick, 
fibrous,  and  resisting,  whilst  its  anterior  third  is  thin  and 
flexible;  no  lachrymal  apparatus  exists.” 


* A slight  dark  tint  around  the  cornea  is  not  uncommon  amongst 
the  dark-skinned  natives  of  warm  countries. 


* 


G 


122 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


OP  ..THE  SEXUAL  ORGANS. 

“ The  sexual  organs  in  both  sexes  of  this  order  of 
animals  come  nearer  in  form  to  those  of  the  ruminating 
than  of  any  others,  and  this  similarity  is  perhaps  more 
remarkable  in  the  female  than  in  the  male,  for  their 
situation  in  the  male  must  vary  on  account  of  external 
form,  as  was  before  observed.  The  testicles  retain  the 
situation  in  which  they  were  formed,  as  in  those 
quadrupeds  in  which  they  never  come  down  into  the 
scrotum.  They  are  situated  near  the  lower  part  of  the 
abdomen,  one  on  each  side,  upon  the  two  great  depressors 
of  the  tail.  At  this  part  of  the  abdomen  the  testicles 
come  in  contact  with  the  abdominal  muscles  anteriorly. 
The  vasa  defferentia  pass  directly  from  the  epididymus 
behind  the  bladder,  or  between  it  and  the  rectum,  into 
the  urethra,  and  there  are  no  bags  similar  to  those  called 
vesiculae  seminales  in  certain  other  animals.  The  struc- 
ture of  the  penis  is  nearly  the  same  in  them  all,  and 
formed  much  upon  the  principle  of  the  quadruped.  It 
is  made  up  of  two  crura,  uniting  into  one  corpus  caver- 
nosum,  and  the  corpus  spongiosum  seems  first  to  enter 
the  corpus  eavernosum.  The  glans  does  not  spread  out 
as  in  many  quadrupeds,  but  seems  to  be  merely  a plexus 
of  veins  covering  the  anterior  end  of  the  penis,  yet  is 
extended  a good  way  further  on,  and  is  in  some  not 
more  than  one  vein  deep.  The  crus  penis  are  attached 
to  two  bones,  which  are  nearly  in  the  same  situation, 
and  in  the  same  part  of  the  pelvis  as  those  to  which  the 
penis  is  attached  in  quadrupeds  ; but  these  bones  are 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE, 


123 


only  for  the  insertion  of  the  crura,  and  not  for  the  sup- 
port of  any  other  part,  like  the  pelvis  of  those  animals 
which  have  posterior  extremities ; neither  do  they  meet 
at  the  forepart  or  join  the  vertebrae  of  the  back.  The 
erectores  penis  are  very  strong  muscles,  having  an  origin 
and  insertion  similar  to  those  of  the  human  subject. 
The  acceleratore  muscles  are  likewise  very  strong ; and 
there  is  a long  and  strong  muscle,  arising  from  the  anus, 
and  passing  forwards  to  the  bulb  of  the  penis,  that  runs 
along  the  under  surface  of  the  urethra,  and  is  at  last 
lost  or  inserted  in  the  corpus  spongiosum. 

This  muscle  draws  the  penis  into  the  prepuce,  and 
throws  that  part  of  the  penis  that  is  behind  its  insertion 
into  a serpentine  form.  It  is  common  to  most  animals 
that  draw  back  the  penis  into  what  is  called  its  sheath, 
and  may  be  called  the  retractor  penis.  In  all  the  females 
which  I have  examined,  the  parts  of  generation  are  very 
uniformly  the  same,  consisting  of  the  external  opening, 
the  vagina,  the  two  horns  of  the  uterus,  fallopian  tubes, 
fimbriae,  and  ovaria. 

The  external  opening  is  a longitudinal  or  oblong 
fissure,  whose  edges  meet  in  two  opposite  points,  and 
the  sides  are  rounded  off  so  as  to  form  a kind  of  sulcus. 
The  skin  and  parts  on  each  side  of  this  sulcus  are  of  a 
looser  texture  than  on  the  common  surface  of  the  animal, 
not  being  loaded  with  oil,  and  allowing  of  such  motion 
of  one  part  and  another  as  admits  of  dilation  and  con* 
traction.  The  vagina  passes  upwards  and  backwards 
towards  the  loins,  so  that  its  direction  is  diagonal  re- 
specting the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  and  then  divides 


124 


ANATOMY  AND  PHYSIOLOGY 


Into  the  two  horns,  one  on  each  side  of  the  loins,  these 
afterwards  terminating  in  the  fallopian  tubes  to  which 
the  ovaria  are  attached.  From  each  ovarium  there  is  a 
small  fold  of  the  peritoneum,  which  passes  up  towards 
the  kidney  of  the  same  side,  as  in  most  quadrupeds. 
The  inside  of  the  vagina  is  smooth  for  about  one  half  of 
Its  length,  and  then  begins  to  form  something  like  valves 
projecting  towards  the  mouth  of  the  vagina,  each  like  an 
os  tincae ; these  are  about  seven,  eight,  or  nine  in  number. 
Where  they  begin  to  form  they  hardly  go  quite  round, 
hut  the  last  are  complete  circles.  At  this  part  too,  the 
vagina  becomes  smaller,  and  gradually  decreases  in  width 
to  its  termination.  From  the  last  projecting  part  the 
passage  is  continued  up  to  the  opening  of  the  two  horns, 
and  the  inner  surface  of  this  last  part  is  thrown  into 
longitudinal  rugae,  which  are  continued  into  the  horns. 
Whether  this  last  part  is  to  be  reckoned  common  uterus 
or  vagina,  and  that  the  last  valvular  part  is  to  be  consi- 
dered as  os  tincae,  I do  not  know ; but,  from  its  having 
the  longitudinal  rugae,  I am  inclined  to  think  it  is 
uterus;  this  structure  appearing  to  be  intended  for 
distinction.  The  horns  are  an  equal  division  of  this 
part ; they  make  a gentle  turn  outwards,  and  are  of  con- 
siderable length ; their  inner  surface  is  thrown  into 
longitudinal  rugae  without  any  small  protuberences  for 
the  colytodons  to  form  upon,  as  in  those  of  ruminating 
animals,  and  where  they  terminate  the  fallopian  tubes 
begin. 

The  fallopian  tubes,  at  their  termination  in  the  uterus, 
are  remarkably  small,  and  then  begin  to  dilate  rather 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


125 


suddenly ; and  the  nearer  to  the  mouth  the  more  this 
dilation  increases,  like  the  mouth  of  a French  horn,  the 
termination  of  which  is  five  or  six  inches  in  diameter. 
They  are  very  full  of  longitudinal  rugae  through  their 
whole  length.  The  ovaria  are  oblong  bodies,  about  five 
inches  in  length,  one  end  attached  to  the  mouth  of  the 
fallopian  tube,  and  the  other  to  the  horn  of  the  uterus. 
They  are  irregular  in  their  external  surface,  resembling 
a capsula  renalis,  or  pancreas.  They  have  no  capsulse 
but  what  is  formed  by  the  long  fallopian  tube.  How 
the  male  and  female  copulate  I do  not  know,  but  it  is 
alleged  that  their  position  in  the  water  at  that  time  is 
erect,  which  I can  readily  suppose  to  be  true.  As  in 
the  sexual  formation  they  most  resemble  those  of  the 
ruminating  kind,  it  is  possible  they  may  likewise  resemble 
them  in  the  duration  of  the  act,  for  I believe  all  the  ru- 
minants are  quick.  Of  their  uterine  gestation  I as  yet 
know  nothing ; but  it  is  very  probable  that  they  have 
only  a single  young  one  at  a time.  The  glands  for  the 
secretion  of  milk  are  two,  one  on  each  side  of  the  middle 
line  of  the  belly  at  its  lower  part.  The  posterior  ends 
from  which  go  out  the  nipples,  are  on  each  side  of  the 
opening  of  the  vagina  in  small  sulci.  They  are  flat 
bodies,  lying  between  the  external  layer  of  fat  and 
abdominal  muscles,  and  are  of  considerable  length,  but 
only  one-fourth  of  that  in  breadth.  They  are  thin,  that 
they  may  not  vary  the  external  shape  of  the  animal,  and 
have  a principal  duct  running  in  the  middle  through  the 
whole  length  of  the  gland,  and  collecting  the  smaller 
lateral  ducts,  which  are  made  up  of  those  still  smaller. 


126  ANATOMY  OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE, 

Some  of  these  lateral  branches  enter  the  common  trunk 
in  the  direction  of  the  milk  passage —others  in  the  con- 
trary  direction,  especially  those  nearest  to  the  termina- 
tion of  the  trunk,  in  the  middle.  The  trunk  is  large,  and 
appears  to  serve  as  a reservoir  for  the  milk,  and  termi- 
nates externally  in  a projection,  which  is  the  nipple. 

The  lateral  portion  of  the  sulcus  which  encloses  the 
nipple  is  composed  of  parts  looser  in  texture  than  the 
common  adipose  membranes,  which  is  probably  to  admit 
of  the  elongation  or  projection  of  the  nipple.  On  the 
outside  of  this  there  is  another  small  fissure,  which  I 
imagine  is  likewise  intended  to  give  greater  facilities  to 
the  movements  of  all  these  parts.  The  milk  is  pro- 
bably very  rich,  for  in  that  caught  near  Berkley,  with  its 
young  one,  the  milk,  which  was  tasted  by  Messrs.  Jenner 
and  Ludlow,  surgeons  at  Sudbury,  was  rich  like  cow’s 
milk  to  which  cream  had  been  added.” 

The  whales  which  Mr.  J.  Hunter  had  opportunities 
of  examining,  were  of  seven  kinds,  viz. : 

The  spermaceti  whale.  The  piked  whale, 

The  Greenland  whale,  The  nar-whale, 

The  bottle-nosed  whale,  Two  grampusses, 

and  several  male  and  female  porpoises. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


SPERMACETI. 


u What  spermaceti  is,”  (says  Sir  Thomas  Brown,  in  his 
work  published  in  1686,  third  book,  chap.  xxv.  p.  139,) 
“ men  might  justly  doubt,  since  the  learned  Hofmannus, 
in  his  wrork  of  thirty  years,  saith  plainly  nescio  quid  sit, 
and  therefore  need  not  wonder  at  the  variety  of  opinions, 
while  some  conceived  it  to  be  flos  maries , and  many  a 
c bituminous  substance  floating  upon  the  sea.’  That  it 
was  not  the  spawn  of  the  whale,  according  to  vulgar 
conceit  or  nominal  appellation,  philosophers  have  always 
doubted,  not  easily  conceiving  the  seminal  humour  of 
animals  should  be  inflammable,  or  of  a floating  nature. 
That  it  proceedeth  from  the  whale,  besides  the  relation 
of  Clusius,  and  other  learned  observers,  was  indubitably 
determined , not  many  years  since,  by  a spermaceti 
whale  cast  on  our  coast  of  Norfolk which  plainly 
informs  us  that  the  source  of  spermaceti  was  not  com- 
monly known  in  the  year  1686,  nor  was  its  use  in  medi- 
cine much  better  understood,  although  Dr.  Thomas  Brown 
informs  us  that  the  “ combers  of  wool  made  use  hereof, 
and  country  people , for  cuts , aches , and  hard  tumours . 
It  may  prove  of  good  medical  use,”  says  he,  “ and  serve 
for  a ground  in  compounded  oyls  and  balsams.”  How- 


/ 


128 


SPERMACETI. 


ever,  during  the  seventeenth  century  it  appears  to  have 
been  largely  used  as  a medicine  for  both  internal  and 
external  complaints.  4‘  The  virtues  of  this  concrete/3 
says  an  old  writer,  “ are  those  of  a mild  emollient ; it  is 
of  considerable  use  in  pains  and  erosions  of  the  intestines, 
in  coughs  proceeding  from  thin  sharp  defluxions,  and  in 
general  in  all  cases  where  the  solids  require  to  be  relaxed, 
or  acrimonious  humours  to  be  obtunded.35 

In  1787,  Mr.  Hunter  gave  the  first  scientific  account 
of  spermaceti,  before  the  Royal  Society,  since  which 
time  it  has  been  gradually  losing  ground  in  the  public 
estimation  as  an  internal  medicinal  remedy,  but  is  still 
used  largely  in  the  composition  of  the  unguentum  cetaeei9 
and  has  within  the  last  few  years  formed  the  principal 
ingredient  in  the  composition  of  candles,  which  are  found 
little  inferior  to  those  which  are  made  of  wax. 

In  Brande’s  Manual  of  Chemistry  we  find  the  follow- 
ing remarks  upon  sperm  oil  and  spermaceti. 

“ The  oil  of  the  spermaceti  whale  is  more  pure,  and 
burns  more  perfectly  and  more  brilliantly  in  lamps  than 
common  whale  oil ; it  deposits,  as  it  cools  after  the  death 
of  the  animal,  a crystalline,  fatty  substance,  called  sperma- 
ceti, which  is  purified  by  pressure  and  boiling  in  weak 
solutions  of  potassa ; it  is  then  washed,  fused  in  boiling 
water,  and  cast  into  blocks  and  cakes,  which  exhibit  a 
beautiful  lamellarly- crystalline  texture,  especially  when 
the  interior  liquid  part  is  suffered  to  run  out  of  the 
exterior  concrete  case.  It  has  a greasy  feel ; its  specific 
gravity  is  about  0*94;  it  fuses  at  1 120 ; 100  parts  of 
boiling  alcohol  of  08*21  dissolves  3*5  parts,  of  which 


SPERMACETI. 


129 


0*9  fall  in  cooling ; its  solution  in  hot  ether  congeals  on 
cooling ; it  dissolves  in  the  hot  oils.  When  common 
spermaceti  is  triturated  with  alcohol,  a little  oily  matter 
is  abstracted,  and,  when  the  whole  is  removed,  the  resi- 
duary pure  spermaceti  has  been  termed  by  Chevreul 
cetin.  Cetin  fuses  at  120°;  100  parts  of  boiling  absolute 
alcohol  dissolves  15*8  of  cetin,  but  alcohol  of  831  only 
3 parts ; the  greater  part  separates,  on  cooling,  in  pearly 
scales ; acids  act  upon  it  as  on  other  fats ; it  is  difficultly 
saponifiable  by  the  hydrated  alkalies ; digested  for 
several  days,  between  120°  and  190°,  with  a solution  of 
caustic  potassa  in  twice  its  weight  of  water;  it  is  at  length 
converted  into  a peculiar  soap,  containing  margarate  and 
oleate  of  potassa,  together  with  an  unsaponifiable  fat, 
which  Chevreul  terms  ethah  On  decomposing  this  soap 
by  an  acid,  ethal  and  oleic  and  margaric  acids  separate, 
amounting  together  to  101*6  parts  from  100  of  cetin;  of 
this  60*96  parts  consist  of  fat  acids  and  40*64  of  ethal. 
"No  glycerine  is  produced,  but  0*9  of  a yellowish  ex- 
tractive matter ; nor  is  any  volatile  acid  formed. 

Chevreul,  Saussure,  and  Berard  have  analysed  cetin 
and  ordinary  spermaceti,  and  Dr.  Ure  spermaceti  oil, 
with  the  following  results  : 

Cetin.  Spermaceti.  Spermaceti.  Spermaceti  oil. 

Chevreul.  Berard.  De  Saussure.  Ure. 

Carbon  81*660  ...  79*5  ...  75*474  ...  78*00 

Hydrogen  ...  12862  ...  11*6  ...  12*795  ...  11*80 

Oxygen  5*478  ...  8*9  ...  11*377  ...  10*20 


130 


CHAPTER  X. 


AMBERGRIS® 

Although  ambergris,  even  during  the  sixteenth  century ^ 
appeared  to  be  much  valued  as  a mercantile  commodity 
by  the  English,  it  is  curious  that  we  knew  nothing  of  its 
source,  and  very  little  of  the  use  which  was  made  of  it 
in  other  countries. 

In  the  year  16729  we  find  the  Hon.  Robert  Boyle 
claiming  the  honour  of  having  discovered  its  source  from 
a manuscript  which  was  found  on  board  a Dutch  East 
Indiaman  which  had  fallen  into  our  hands  by  the  chance 
of  war.  This  precious  document  stated,  that  “amber- 
greese  is  not  the  scum  or  excrement  of  the  whale,  but 
issues  out  of  the  root  of  a tree,  which  tree,  howsoever 
it  stands  on  the  land,  alwaies  shoots  forth  its  roots 
towards  the  sea,  seeking  the  warmth  of  it,  thereby  to 
deliver  the  fattest  gum  that  comes  out  of  it,  which  tree 
otherwise  by  its  copious  fatness  might  be  burnt  and 
destroyed : wherever  that  fat  gum  is  shot  into  the  sea, 
it  is  so  tough  that  it  is  not  easily  broken  from  the  root, 
unless  its  own  weight  and  the  working  of  the  warm  sea 
doth  it,  and  so  it  floats  on  the  sea ; there  was  found  by  a 
souldier  -|tlis  of  a pound,  and  by  the  chief  two  pieces, 
weighing  five  pounds.  If  you  plant  the  trees  where  the 


AMBERGRIS. 


131 


stream  sets  to  the  shore,  then  the  stream  will  cast  it  up 
to  great  advantage!  March  1st,  1672,  in  Batavia.”* — 
Phil . Trans vol.  viii.  p.  6113. 

But  notwithstanding  the  above  statement,  Dr.  Thomas 
Brown,  in  his  work  published  a few  years  afterwards 
(1686),  in  his  description  of  a sperm  whale  which  was 
thrown  on  the  coast  of  Norfolk,  states  that  “ in  vain  it 
was  to  rake  for  ambergriese  in  the  paunch  of  this  levia- 
than, as  Greenland  discoverers,  and  attests  of  experience 
dictate,  that  they  sometimes  swallow  great  lumps  thereof 
in  the  sea— insufferable  fetor  denying  that  inquiry  ; and 
yet  if,  as  Paracelsus  encourageth,  ordure  makes  the  best 
musk,  and  from  the  most  feted  substances  may  be  drawn 
the  most  odoriferous  essences,  all  that  had  not  Vespa- 
sian’s nose  might  boldly  swear  here  was  a substance  for 
such  extractions which  proves  that  the  Dr.  still  sus- 
pected that  the  ambergris  was  found  in  the  sperm  whale, 
although  it  was  found  by  this  animal  floating  in  the  sea, 
and  swallowed  by  it  in  “ great  lumps!” 

But  it  was  reserved  for  Dr.  Boylston,  of  Boston,  to 
enlighten  mankind  on  this  important  subject,  and  he 
therefore  claims  the  discovery  of  its  source  in  the  follow- 
ing manner : “ The  most  learned  part  of  mankind  are 
still  at  a loss  about  many  things  even  in  medical  use, 
and  particularly  were  so,  in  what  is  called  ambergris, 
until  our  whale  fishermen  of  Nantucket,  in  New  Eng- 
land, some  three  or  four  years  past  made  the  discovery. 
Their  account  to  me  is  this  : — cutting  up  a spermaceti 
bull-whale,  they  found  accidentally  in  him  about  twenty 
pounds’  weight,  more  or  less,  of  that  drug  ; after  which, 


132 


AMBERGRIS. 


they  and  other  such  fishermen  became  very  curious  in 
searching  all  such  whales  they  killed,  and  it  has  been 
since  found  in  lesser  quantities  in  several  male  whales 
of  that  kind,  and  in  no  other,  and  that  scarcely  in  one 
of  a hundred  of  them.  They  add  further,  that  it  is 
contained  in  a cyst  or  bag,  without  any  inlet  or  outlet 
to  it,  and  that  they  have  sometimes  found  the  bag 
empty  and  yet  entire ; the  bag  is  nowhere  to  be  found 
but  near  the  genital  parts  of  the  fish.  The  ambergris  is 
when  first  taken  out  moist,  and  of  an  exceedingly  strong 
and  offensive  smell.”  This  letter  was  written  to  the 
Royal  Society  in  1724 .—Phil.  Trans . vol.  xxxiii.  p.  193. 

In  the  same  year,  however,  we  have  another  letter 
from  America,  written  to  the  Royal  Society  by  the  Hon. 
Paul  Dudley,  f.r.s.,  who,  after  telling  us  that  the  old 
sperm  whales  carry  their  young  ones  “on  the  flukes  of 
their  tails,  who  with  their  fins  clasp  about  the  small, 
and  hold  themselves  on,”  also  says  “ one  of  our  country 
doctors  tells  me  that  the  tooth  of  this  fish  (sperm  whale) 
shaved  or  powdered,  and  so  infused  in  liquor,  equals 
the  hartshorn,  and  has  been  used  in  the  small-pox,  and 
given  to  lying-in  women  in  case  of  sickness,  with 
success  ! — the  quantity  is  as  much  as  will  lie  upon  an 
English  shilling.”  Further  on  in  the  same  letter  he 
states,  “ I meddle  not  here  with  the  precious  ambergris 
found  in  this  whale,  because  I design  to  close  the  whole 
with  that  discovery.”  And  here  is  his  conclusion : 
“ But  truth,”  says  he,  “ is  the  daughter  of  time ; it  is 
now  at  length  found  out,  that  occultum  naturae  is  an 
animal  production,  and  bred  in  the  body  of  the  sperma- 


AMBERGRIS. 


ceti  whale.  I doubt  not/’  he  continues,  “ hut  in  process 
of  time  some  further  particulars  may  be  procured  with 
respect  to  ambergris,  and  I shall  be  proud  to  transmit 
them ; in  the  mean  time  I hope  the  Society  will  accept 
of  this  first  essay,  and  allow  my  poor  country  the  honour 
of  discovering , or  at  least  ascertaining,  the  origin  and 
nature  of  ambergris.”— Phil.  Trans . vol.  xxxiii. 

In  a paper  which  was  read  before  the  Royal  Society 
by  Dr.  Schwediawer,  in  1783,  respecting  the  medical 
properties  of  ambergris,  he  remarks,  that  u if  we  wish  to 
see  any  medicinal  effects  from  this  substance,  we  must 
certainly  not  expect  them  from  two  or  three  grains,  but 
give  rather  as  many  scruples  of  it  for  a dose ; though  even 
then  I should  not  expect  much  from  it,  as  I have  taken 
of  pure  unadulterated  ambergris  in  powder  thirty  grains 
at  once,  without  observing  the  least  sensible  effect  from 
it.  A sailor,  however,  who  had  the  curiosity  to  try  the 
effects  of  some  recent  ambergris  upon  himself,  took  half 
an  ounce  of  it  melted  upon  the  fire,  and  found  it  a good 
purgative,  which  proves  that  it  is  not  quite  inert.”— 
Phil . Trans . vol.  lxxiii.  p.  226. 

In  1791,  the  attention  of  government  was  drawn  to 
this  subject,  in  order  to  discover  if  it  could  be  more  fre- 
quently found.  When  Captain  Coffin  was  examined  at 
the  bar  of  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  subject,  and 
stated  that  he  had  lately  brought  home  362  ounces, 
troy,  of  this  costly  substance,  which  he  had  found  in  the 
anus  of  a female  sperm  whale  that  he  had  captured  off 
the  coast  of  Guinea,  and  which  he  stated  was  very  bony 
and  sickly.  At  the  time  he  brought  this  quantity  to 


134 


AMBERGRIS® 


England,  the  ambergris  was  selling  for  255.  an  ounce, 
but  he  stated  that  he  had  sold  his  for  195.  6d.  per  ounce, 
to  a broker  who  exported  it  to  Turkey,  Germany,  and 
France,  among  the  natives  of  which  it  appears  to  have 
been  long  celebrated  for  its  aphrodisiacal  properties. 

“ The  use  of  ambergris, 5?  says  Brande,  “ in  Europe 
is  now  nearly  confined  to  perfumery,  though  it  has 
formerly  been  used  in  medicine  by  many  eminent  physi- 
cians. In  Asia  and  part  of  Africa,  ambergris  is  not  only 
used  as  a medicine  and  perfume,  but  considerable  use  is 
also  made  of  it  in  cooking,  by  adding  it  to  several  dishes 
as  a spice.  A great  quantity  of  it  is  also  constantly 
bought  by  the  pilgrims  who  travel  to  Mecca,  probably 
to  offer  it  there,  and  make  use  of  it  in  fumigations,  in 
the  same  manner  as  frankincense  is  used  in  Catholic 
countries.  The  Turks  make  use  of  it  as  an  aphrodisiac. 
Our  perfumers  add  it  to  scented  pastiles,  candles,  balls, 
bottles,  gloves,  and  hair  powder ; and  its  essence  is 
mixed  with  pomatum  for  the  face  and  hands,  either  alone 
or  united  with  musk,  though  its  smell  is  to  some  persons 
extremely  offensive.  Ambergris  may  be  known  to  be 
genuine  by  its  fragrant  scent  when  a hot  needle  or  pin 
is  thrust  into  it,  and  its  melting  like  fat  of  a uniform 
consistence,  whereas  the  counterfeit  will  not  yield  such 
a smell,  nor  prove  of  such  a fat  texture.  One  thing, 
however,  is  very  remarkable,  that  a resemblance  to  the 
smell  of  this  drug,  which  is  the  most  agreeable  of  all  the 
perfumes,  should  be  produced  by  a preparation  of  one 
of  the  most  odious  of  all  substances.  Mr.  Homberg 
found  that  a vessel  in  which  he  had  made  a long  diges- 


AMBERGRIS. 


tion  of  human  faeces,  acquired  a very  strong  and  perfect 
smell  of  ambergris,  inasmuch  that  any  one  would  have 
thought  that  a great  quantity  of  essence  of  ambergris  had 
been  made  in  it,  the  perfume  was  so  strong  and  offensive 
that  the  vessel  had  to  be  removed  from  the  laboratory ! 
Brandes  Manual  of  Chemistry , p.  594. 

Ambergris  appears  to  be  nothing  but  the  hardened 
faeces  of  the  spermaceti  whale,  which  is  pretty  well  proved 
from  its  being  mixed  so  intimately  with  the  refuse  of  its 
food  (the  squids’  beaks).  Mr.  Enderby  has  in  his  pos- 
session a fine  specimen  of  this  substance,  about  six  or 
seven  inches  long,  and  which  bears  very  evident  marks 
of  having  been  moulded  by  the  lower  portion  of  the 
rectum  of  the  whale. 

On  one  occasion,  while  in  the  North  Pacific,  I had  the 
curiosity  to  collect  some  of  the  semi-fluid  faeces  which 
floated  from  the  carcass  of  a whale  while  our  men  were 
cutting  it  in,  and  which  on  being  dried  in  the  sun  bore 
all  the  properties  of  ambergris. 


CHAPTER  XI. 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE  FISHERY, 

The  origin  of  the  sperm  whale  fishery — that  is,  before 
it  became  organized  as  a branch  of  commerce— like  the 
origin  of  other  fisheries  of  the  same  nature,  is  involved 
in  such  deep  mystery  as  almost  altogether  to  defy  the 
searching  acumen  of  the  historian.  Without  looking 
into  the  ancient,  romancing,  and  classical  histories, 
with  which  most  of  the  countries  of  Europe  abound, 
and  which  contain  wonderful  stories  of  the  appearance, 
death,  or  capture  of  the  sperm  whale,  or  other  creatures 
of  the  same  order,  it  may  be  sufficient  for  some  of  us 
to  know,  that  during  the  early  part  of  the  last  century 
a few  daring  individuals  who  inhabited  the  shores  of 
the  American  continent,  fitted  out  their  little  crafts, 
furnished  with  weak  and  almost  impotent  weapons,  to 
attack  and  destroy  in  its  own  element  the  mighty 
monarch  of  the  ocean,  in  order  to  rob  his  immense 
carcass  of  the  valuable  commodity  with  which  it  is 
surrounded.  But  even  as  far  back  as  the  year  1667, 
we  find  a letter,  published  in  the  second  volume  of  the 
Philosophical  Transactions , from  Mr.  Richard  Norwood, 
who  resided  at  the  Bermudas,  which  states  that  the 
whale  fishery  had  been  carried  on  in  the  bays  of  those 
islands  for  “ two  or  three  years,’*  evidently  meaning  the 


THE  SPERM  WHALE  FISHERY 


187 


black  whale  fishery  ; for  in  another  part  he  says,  “I  hear 
not  that  they  have  found  any  sperma  ceti  in  any  of 
those  whales  ;”  but  subsequently  he  states  in  the  same 
letter,  “ I have  heard  from  credible  persons  that  there  is 
a kind  of  whale  having  great  teeth , as  have  the  sperma 
ceti  at  Eleutheria,  and  others  of  the  Bermuda  islands „ 
One  of  this  place, ” he  continues,  u John  Perinchief, 
found  one  there  dead  driven  upon  an  island,  and  though 
I think  ignorant  in  the  business,  yet  got  a great  quantity 
of  sperma  ceti  out  of  it/’  He  says  again,  “ It  seems 
they  have  not  so  much  oil  as  ours  (meaning  the  black 
whale),  but  the  oil,  I hear,  is  at  first  like  sperma  ceti* 
but  they  clarifie  it,  I think,  by  the  fire.”  But  in  vol.  iii. 
Phil.  Trans.,  in  a letter  from  the  same  place,  written  a 
year  or  two  afterwards,  we  find  something  like  a begin- 
ning of  the  sperm  whale  fishery  threatened  by  a Mr, 
Richard  Stafford,  who  informs  us  that  he  has  killed 
several  black  whales  himself,  and  who  is  represented  as 
a very  intelligent  gentleman.  He  says,  “ great  stores  of 
whales  make  use  of  our  coast;”  but  in  another  part  he 
states  — “ but  here  have  been  seen  sperma  ceti  whales 
driven  upon  the  shore— -these  have  divers  teeth,  about 
the  bigness  of  a man’s  wrist.  I have  been,”  says  he, 
“ at  the  Bahama  islands,  and  there  have  seen  of  this  same 
sort  of  whale,  dead  on  the  shore,  with  sperma  all  over 
their  bodies.  Myself \ and  about  twenty  others , have 
agreed  to  try  whether  we  can  master  and  hill  them , for 
I could  never  hear  of  any  of  that  sort  that  was  hilled  by 
any  man , such  is  their  fierceness  and  swiftness He 
concludes  by  remarking,  that  one  such  whale  would 


138 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE 


be  worth  many  hundred  pounds!”  A weighty  reason 
for  the  establishment  of  the  fishery  no  doubt.  The 
same  writer  in  another  part  of  his  letter  states,  “there  is 
one  island  among  the  Bahamas,  which  some  of  our 
people  are  settled  upon,  and  more  are  going  thither. 
It  is  called  New  Providence , where  many  rare  things 
might  be  discovered,  if  the  people  were  but  encouraged.” 
This  same  New  Providence  afterwards  became  so  famous 
as  a whale  fishing  station,  by  the  exertions  of  our 
American  descendants.  But  even  before  these  needy 
adventurers  commenced  their  career  of  spermaceti  hunt- 
ing, we  have  had  it  proved  to  us  that  the  Indians 
who  inhabited  the  shores  of  America  used  to  voyage 
out  to  sea  and  attack  this  animal  from  their  canoes,  and 
pierce  him  with  their  lances  of  wood,  or  other  instruments 
of  the  same  material,  which  were  barbed,  and  which 
before  they  were  plunged  into  his  flesh  were  fastened  by 
a short  warp,  or  piece  of  rope,  to  a large  block  of  light 
wood,  which  was  thrown  overboard  the  moment  the 
barbed  instrument  was  thrust  into  its  body,  which— 
being  repeated  at  every  rising  of  the  whale,  or  when  they 
were  so  fortunate  as  to  get  near  enough  to  do  so — in  a 
few  instances,  by  a sort  of  worrying-to-death  system, 
rewarded  the  enterprising  savage  with  the  lifeless  body 
of  his  victim,  but  which  in  most  cases  was  that  of  a very 
young  one;  and  even  this,  when  towed  to  the  shore,  it 
was  impossible  for  them  to  turn  over,  so  that  they  were 
obliged  to  content  themselves  with  flinching  the  fat  from 
one  side  of  the  body  only.  Few,  indeed,  must  these 
instances  have  been,  when  we  consider  the  means  that 


SPERM  WHALE  FISHERY 


139 


were  employed  in  the  capture  of  so  immense  an  animal, 
possessing  such  enormous  strength,  by  which  their  barbed 
spears  or  lances  of  wood  must  have  been  frequently 
shivered  to  atoms,  or  drawn  from  the  flesh  of  the  whale 
by  the  resistance  the  blocks  of  wood  to  which  they  were 
attached  must  have  occasioned,  when  the  animal  became 
frightened  into  its  utmost  speed ; and  when  we  know  at 
the  present  time,  that  by  their  powerful  actions  and 
convulsive  movements  the  best-tempered  iron,  of  which 
our  harpoons  and  lances  are  made,  frequently  becomes 
twisted  to  pieces,  while  the  boats  which  are  used  in  the 
chase  are  often  thrown  high  into  the  air  with  the  head, 
or  broken  to  fragments  by  one  blow  of  the  tail,  of  this 
enormous  creature. 

But  although,  as  has  been  before  stated,  Mr.  Richard 
Stafford  had  threatened  to  commence  the  sperm  whale 
fishery  at  the  Bahama  islands,  it  appears  rather  doubtful 
whether  he  did  so  or  not,  when  we  come  to  peruse  the 
letter  of  the  Hon.  Paul  Dudley,  f.  r»  s.,  published  in 
1724,  Phil . Trans . vol.  xxxiii.,  an  extract  of  which 
states,  “ I very  lately  received  from  one  Mr.  Atkins,  an 
inhabitant  of  Boston,  in  New  England , who  used  the 
whale  fishery  for  ten  or  twelve  years  (black  whales),  and 
was  one  of  the  first  that  went  out  a-fishing  for  the  sperma 
ceti  whales  about  the  year  1720.”  It  also  appears  in  this 
account,  that  the  fishery  even  then  was  very  little  under- 
stood, for  Mr.  Atkins  himself  says,  “ he  never  saw,  nor 
certainly  heard  of  a sperma  ceti  female  taken  in  his  life,52 
for  he  states,  “ the  cows  of  that  species  of  whale,  being 
much  more  timorous  than  the  males,  and  almost  impos- 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE 


sible  to  come  at,  unless  when  haply  found  asleep  upon 
the  water,  or  detained  by  their  calves.” 

In  another  part  of  his  letter,  the  Hon.  Paul  Dudley 
states,  “Our  people  formerly  used  to  kill  the  whale  near 
the  shore,  but  now  they  go  off  to  sea  in  sloops  and  whale- 
boats.” “Sometimes,”  he  says,  “the  whale  is  killed 
by  a single  stroke,  and  yet  at  other  times  she  will  hold 
the  whalemen  in  play  near  half  a day  together  with  their 
lances,  and  sometimes  they  will  get  away  after  they  have 
been  lanced,  and  spouted  thick  blood,  with  irons  in  them, 
and  drugs  (drouges)  fastened  to  them,  which  are  thick 
boards  about  fourteen  inches  square.” 

But,  even  after  the  capture  of  the  sperm  whale  had 
occasionally  been  carried  on  in  ships  by  the  descendants 
of  the  European  settlers  upon  the  American  shores,  who 
struck  the  whales  with  the  harpoon,  having  a log  of  wood 
attached  after  the  Indian  fashion,  it  was  a considerable 
time  before  any  great  improvement  manifested  itself  in 
their  mode  of  fishing.  Presumptuous  indeed  was  he 
deemed  who  first  proposed  to  chase  and  capture  such 
huge  beings  in  small  boats,  and  by  the  aid  of  lines  at  the 
end  of  which  was  attached  the  harpoon,  by  which  they 
could  draw  themselves  to  the  harpooned  whale  when- 
ever they  wished  to  destroy  it  with  the  lance. 

An  American  whaler,  who  had  been  bred  from  his 
boyhood  in  the  service,  informed  me  that  his  grandfather 
had  been  employed  on  a whaling  expedition  in  a small 
vessel  off  the  coast  of  America,  and  that,  having  expe- 
rienced a great  deal  of  ill  success  in  consequence  of  their 
being  unable  to  capture  any  whales  by  means  of  the  log- 


SPERM  WHALE  FISHERY. 


141 


harpoon,  the  captain  of  their  little  bark  wished  them 
to  make  trial  of  the  method  of  which  they  had  just  heard, 
by  the  boat  and  line;  but  to  his  irresolute  seamen  the 
idea  appeared  monstrous, — the  mere  thought  of  having 
the  boat  they  were  in  attached  to  an  infuriated  leviathan 
by  a strong  rope,  struck  terror  among  the  whole  crew. 
“What,’*  said  they,  “ shall  we  be  dragged  to  the  bottom 
of  the  sea  ? shall  we  be  towed  with  the  velocity  of  light- 
ning to  the  other  side  of  the  world  ? shall  we  be  torn  to 
pieces  by  the  jaws  of  the  monstrous  fish  that  we  may  be 
fastened  to  ?”  In  vain  did  their  captain  explain  to  them 
the  various  means  they  could  employ  to  avoid  those 
anticipated  dangers  ; he  urged  their  reason  to  note  the 
excellence  of  the  plan,  but  his  eloquence  proved  of  no 
avail ; so  fearful  were  they  of  this  dangerous  innovation 
on  their  old  method,  that  the  very  rope  which  the  captain 
had  prepared  for  the  service  was  pointed  through  the 
ship’s  stern,  during  the  night,  and  allowed  to  run  over- 
board. But  nevertheless,  others  more  daring  undertook 
the  trial  soon  afterwards,  in  which  they  frequently  came 
off  victorious,  so  that  the  new  method  was  established 
among  them,  and  has  since  been  much  improved.- — (See 
Chapters  xi.  and  xii.) 

The  fishery  was  thus  carried  on  at  first  by  a few  indi- 
viduals in  America  from  their  own  shores,  but  as  their 
numbers  increased  the  quantity  of  whales  diminished,  so 
that,  in  a fewT  years,  they  had  not  only  destroyed  great 
numbers  of  these  useful  animals,  but  had  driven  the 
remainder  to  find  more  secure  retreats,  in  which  they 
could  follow  their  natural  inclinations,  without  being 
harassed  by  the  chase  or  wounded  by  the  harpoon. 


142 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE 


But,  about  the  year  1771,  we  find  that  the  American 
navigators  were  engaged  with  extraordinary  ardour  in  the 
whale  fisheries  which  were  carried  on  in  the  north  and 
south  Atlantic  oceans.  From  the  year  1771  to  1775 
Massachusets  alone  employed  annually  183  vessels, 
carrying  13,820  tons  in  the  former,  and  121  vessels 
carrying  14,026  tons  in  the  latter. 

Mr.  Burke,  in  his  famous  speech  on  American  affairs 
in  1774,  adverted  to  this  wonderful  display  of  daring 
enterprise  in  the  following  eloquent  words:  “As  to  the 
wealth,”  said  he,  “ which  the  colonists  have  drawn  from 
the  sea  by  their  fisheries,  you  had  all  that  matter  fully 
opened  at  your  bar.  You  surely  thought  these  acquisitions 
of  value,  for  they  seemed  to  excite  your  envy,  and  yet  the 
spirit  by  which  that  enterprising  employment  has  been 
exercised  ought  rather,  in  my  opinion,  to  have  raised 
your  esteem  and  admiration.  And  pray,  sir,  what  in 
the  world  is  equal  to  it?  Pass  by  the  other  parts,  and 
look  at  the  manner  in  which  the  New  England  people 
carry  on  the  whale  fishery.  While  we  follow  them 
among  the  trembling  mountains  of  ice,  and  behold  them 
penetrating  into  the  deepest  frozen  recesses  of  Hudson’s 
and  Davis’s  Straits,  while  we  are  looking  for  them  be- 
neath the  arctic  circle,  we  hear  that  they  have  pierced 
into  the  opposite  region  of  polar  cold— that  they  are  at 
the  antipodes,  and  engaged  under  the  frozen  serpent  of 
the  south.  Falkland  Island,  which  seems  too  remote 
for  the  grasp  of  national  ambition,  is  but  a stage  and 
resting  place  for  their  victorious  industry.  Nor  is  the 
equinoctial  heat  more  discouraging  to  them  than  the 


SPERM  WHALE  FISHERY. 


143 


accumulated  winter  of  both  poles.  We  learn,  that  while 
some  of  them  draw  the  line  or  strike  the  harpoon  on  the 
coast  of  Africa,  others  run  the  longitude,  and  pursue 
their  gigantic  game  along  the  coast  of  Brazil.  No  sea, 
but  what  is  vexed  with  their  fisheries — no  climate  that 
is  not  witness  of  their  toils.  Neither  the  perseverance 
of  Holland,  nor  the  activity  of  France,  nor  the  dexterous 
and  firm  sagacity  of  English  enterprise,  ever  carried  this 
most  perilous  mode  of  hardy  industry  to  the  extent  to 
which  it  has  been  pursued  by  this  recent  people,— a 
people  who  are  still  in  the  gristle,  and  not  hardened  into 
manhood.” 

Whether  this  eloquent  address  had  any  effect  or  not 
upon  the  minds  of  our  own  merchants  and  ship-owners 
in  stimulating  them  to  fit  out  ships  for  the  sperm  and 
other  whale  fisheries,  I am  not  aware,  but  it  is  certain 
that  in  the  following  year  (1775)  the  first  attempt  was 
made  to  establish  the  sperm  whale  fishery  from  Britain; 
and  we  accordingly  find,  from  private  statements  on 
which  I can  securely  rely,  that  ships  of  from  100  to  109 
tons  burthen  were  sent  to  South  Greenland,  coast  of 
Brazil,  Falkland  Islands,  and  the  Gulf  of  Guinea,  for 
the  purpose  of  procuring  sperm  and  other  oils.  The 
names  of  the  ships  which  were  thus  employed  in  these 
distinct  expeditions  were  the  “ Union,’’  “ Neptune,” 
“ Rockingham,”  “ America,”  “ Abigail,  ” “ Hanover,” 
“ Industry,”  “ Dennis,  ” “ Beaver,  ” and  “Sparrow;” 
but  the  principal  places  of  resort  of  the  spermaceti  whale 
not  having  been  yet  discovered,  these  vessels  met  with 
very  trifling  success. 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF  THE 


In  the  following  year,  1776,  the  government,  with  a 
view  to  stimulate  all  persons  engaged  in  these  fisheries, 
established  a principle  of  reward  for  those  ships  which 
were  most  successful  in  their  endeavours  ; in  accordance 
with  which,  five  different  bounties  or  premiums  were 
offered,  forming  a scale  of  prizes  for  those  who  were  so 
fortunate  as  to  prove  the  five  gradations  of  success, — -the 
sum  of  five  hundred  pounds  being  the  maximum,  and 
that  of  one  hundred  being  the  minimum  prize. 

In  1781,  four  ships  were  fitted  out  for  th£  river  St. 
Lawrence,  but  after  they  had  been  out  a considerable 
time  they  returned  with  the  discouraging  announcement 
of  having  only  procured  six  gallons  of  sperm  oil  among 
them  during  the  whole  time  of  their  absence. 

In  1784,  France,  which  it  appears  had  preceded  the 
other  nations  of  Europe  in  the  whale  fishery,  but  had 
for  many  years  past  for  some  cause  or  other  hardly  had 
any  share  in  it,  now  endeavoured  to  revive  it,  and  with 
this  view  Louis  XVI.  fitted  out  six  ships  from  Dunkirk 
on  his  own  account,  which  were  furnished  at  a great 
expense  with  a number  of  experienced  harpooners  and 
able  seamen  from  Nantucket. 

The  adventure  was  more  successful  than  could  have 
been  reasonably  expected  considering  the  auspices  under 
which  it  was  carried  on.  Several  private  individuals 
followed  the  example  of  his  majesty,  according  to 
Mr.  M'Culloch,  “and  in  1790,  France  had  about  forty 
ships  employed  in  the  fishery.  The  revolutionary  war 
destroyed  every  vestige  of  this  rising  trade.  Since  the 
peace  the  government  has  made  great  efforts  for  its 


THE  SPERM  WHALE  FISHERY. 


145 


renewal,  but  hitherto  without  success ; and  it  is  singular, 
that  with  the  exception  of  an  American  house  at  Dun- 
kirk hardly  any  one  has  thought  of  sending  out  a ship 
from  France.” 

In  the  year  1785,  the  English  ship  “Masters”  began 
to  discover  the  haunts  of  the  sperm  whale,  the  principal 
object  of  pursuit,  for  we  find  that  after  they  had  been 
out  about  twelve  months,  many  vessels  returned  with 
from  twenty  to  eighty  tons  of  sperm  oil  each,  so  that  in 
the  year  1786,  we  find  three  hundred  and  twenty -seven 
tons  of  sperm  oil  was  brought  to  this  country,  and 
which  sold  for  43Z.  per  ton.  And  the  success  which 
attended  our  whaling  expeditions  at  this  time  was  quite 
equal  to  that  with  which  the  American  whalers  met 
with. 

In  1786,  the  bounties  were  increased  to  70QZ.  maxi- 
mum and  300Z.  minimum,  which  had  the  effect  of 
increasing  the  perseverance  and  activity  of  our  whalers, 
for  we  now  discover  them  staying  out  eighteen  and  even 
twenty-eight  months,  and  bringing  home  much  larger 
quantities  of  sperm  oil.  During  the  year,  1788,  the 
ships  that  were  sent  out  were  much  increased  in  size,  so 
that  they  were  frequently  of  from  150  to  300  tons 
burden  ; and  they  still  continued,  like  the  Americans,  to 
fish  on  this  side  Cape  Horn,  taking  the  common  black , 
as  well  as  the  sperm  whale  at  such  places  as  the  Gulf 
of  Guinea,  coast  of  Brazil,  Falkland  Islands,  and  for 
sperm  whales  in  particular,  about  the  equinoctial  line. 

But  if  the  Americans  had  been  the  first  to  establish  the 
fishery  on  their  own  shores,  and  even  throughout  the 

H 


146 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF 


North  and  South  Atlantic  oceans,  it  was  the  destiny  of 
the  mother  country  to  enjoy  the  honour  of  opening  the 
invaluable  sperm  fisheries  of  the  two  Pacifies , the  disco- 
very of  which  formed  an  era  in  the  commercial  history 
of  this  country.  For  not  only  was  the  sperm  whale 
fishery  by  this  discovery  prodigiously  increased,  but 
other  commercial  advantages  rapidly  accrued  from  the 
whalers  who  resorted  to  these  seas  opening  a trade  with 
the  people  who  inhabited  the  extensive  shores  which 
bound  the  enormous  ocean. 

64  The  importance  of  the  southern  whale  fishery,”  says 
a gentleman  who  is  deeply  conversant  with  the  whole 
subject,  44  has  never  been  duly  appreciated ; it  is  not 
generally  known/9  says  he,  “ that  it  is  to  this  important 
branch  of  trade,  and  nursery  for  seamen,  that  we  owe 
the  opening  of  commerce  with  South  America,  and  which 
even  caused  the  separation  of  the  Spanish  colonies  in  the 
Pacific  Ocean  from  the  parent  state.  So  meanly  jealous 
was  Spain  of  the  interference  of  foreigners  with  the  trade 
of  her  American  colonies,  that  it  was  with  the  greatest 
difficulty,  on  the  opening  of  the  sperm  whale  fishery  in 
the  Pacific,  that  we  could  obtain  permission  for  our  ships 
to  cruise  within  a hundred  Italian  miles  of  their  coasts 
—and  it  was  only  through  a few  of  our  ships  at  first 
claiming  the  right  of  wooding  and  watering  in  a friendly 
port  that  a trade  was  first  established,  which  spread  in 
all  directions  the  moment  the  great  mutual  advantages 
were  felt.  The  enterprise  of  the  ship-owners,”  he  con» 
tinues,  “ engaged  in  the  whale  fishery  knew  no  bounds. 
They  sent  ships  to  all  parts  of  the  world — to  places  at 


THE  SPERM  WHALE  FISHERY. 


147 


which  no  merchant  vessel  would  have  had  cause  to  ven- 
ture, so  that  lands  were  visited  upon  which  important 
colonies  have  been  formed  : — what  merchant  vessel 
would  have  visited  Van  Diemen’s  Land,  or  even  Aus- 
tralia ? Having  no  object  or  prospect  of  gain,  and  lying 
as  they  both  did,  out  of  the  track  of  our  merchantmen, 
it  is  not  to  be  believed  that  they  could  have  been  much 
visited  by  them.  But  our  whaling  vessels,  cruising  for 
whales,  examined  their  shores  and  brought  home  infor- 
mation respecting  their  value,  and  what  was  still  more 
important,  they  carried  out  people  to  reside  upon  them, 
and  established  a regular  communication  between  them 
and  our  own  country — by  which  the  wants  of  the  primi- 
tive settlers  could  be  supplied  and  their  persons  protected, 
and  which  could  not  have  been  done  by  other  ships 
except  at  a frightful  expense— at  a time  too,  when  the 
settlement  of  the  above  now  valuable  and  flourishing 
colonies  was  a mere  experiment,  with  many  sneering  at 
the  project  as  an  ignis  fatuus  ; — evidence  inclines  us  to 
believe  that  these  colonies  would  never  have  existed  had 
it  not  been  for  whaling  vessels  approaching  their  shores. 
It  is  a fact,  that  the  original  settlers  at  Botany  Bay  were 
more  than  once  saved  from  starvation  by  the  timely 
arrival  of  some  whaling  vessels. 

“ But  if  our  commerce  has  received  benefit  from  our 
southern  whaling  expeditions,  our  intimate  knowledge 
of  the  Polynesian  islanders  has  also  arisen  from  the 
same  means ; and  if  missionaries  have  gone  to  reside 
among  these  people  with  the  view  of  spreading  among 
them  a belief  in  the  Christian  faith,  these  messengers 


148 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF 


have  been  preceded  by  the  whaler,  who  has  opened  a 
barter  with  the  savage,  and  brought  about  a friendly 
regard  towards  us,  by  which  he  has  secured  a ready 
welcome  to  the  missionaries ; and  they  are  doing  so  at 
the  present  hour  at  New  Guinea,  New  Ireland,  New 
Britain,  and  at  hundreds  of  islands  in  the  south  Pacific  ; 
New  Zealand  has  been  succeeded  with  in  the  same  way, 
and  if  it  was  not  for  these  preliminary  meetings,  not  a 
missionary  would  dare  to  step  upon  their  shores.55 

In  1788,  the  grand  mercantile  speculation  of  sending 
ships  round  Cape  Horn  into  the  Pacific,  in  order  to 
extend  the  sperm  whale  fishery  was  reserved  for  the 
bold  and  enterprising  mind  of  Mr.  Enderby,  a London 
merchant  and  ship-owner,  who  fitted  out,  at  a vast 
expense,  the  ship  44  Amelia,”  Captain  Shields,  which 
sailed  from  England  on  the  1st  of  September  1788,  and 
returned  on  the  12th  of  March  1790,  making  an  absence 
of  one  year  and  seven  months,  but  bringing  home  the 
enormous  cargo  of  139  tons  of  sperm  oil!  and  likewise 
having  the  good  fortune  to  receive  800£.  more  by  way 
of  an  increased  bounty  in  consequence  of  the  peculiar 
nature  of  the  expedition.  The  44  Amelia”  having  been 
the  first  ship  of  any  country  which  had  entered  the 
Pacific  in  search  of  whales,  her  success  gave  an  amazing 
impulse  to  all  persons  engaged  in  the  fisheries,  so  that 
several  ships  both  from  this  country  and  America  imme- 
diately followed  in  her  track,  for  on  her  return  in  1790, 
many  vessels  were  directly  sent  off,  the  crews  of  which 
continued  the  fishery  along  the  coast  of  Chili  and  Peru 
with  great  advantage ; so  that  in  1791,  we  had  a great 


THE  SPERM  WHALE  FISHERY. 


149 


addition  in  the  importation  of  sperm  oil,  amounting  this 
year  to  1258  tons;  making  an  increase  over  the  import- 
ation in  the  year  1786,  of  931  tons. 

In  1791,  the  bounties  were  again  altered;  but  the 
alteration  merely  related  to  the  time  the  ships  should 
remain  out.  The  ships  which  were  at  this  time  engaged 
in  the  fishery  carried  from  twenty-two  to  thirty  men 
each.  This  enterprising  branch  of  commerce  was  carried 
on  year  after  year  with  considerable  success,  subject  to 
but  slight  variations  in  the  annual  and  gradual  increase 
in  the  importation  of  oil,  giving  employmen|^to  a vast 
number  of  persons,  many  of  whom  were  enriched  to  an 
immense  amount  by  the  success  which  attended  their 
exertions  in  this  now  profitable  pursuit. 

In  the  year  1802,  ships  were  sent  to  whale  off  the 
island  of  New  Zealand,  where  they  frequently  met  with 
considerable  success.  In  1803,  many  vessels  were 
ploughing  the  China  Seas  about  the  Molucca  Islands  in 
search  of  the  sperm  whale,  and  with  the  same  encourag- 
ing results.  In  passing  over  a lapse  of  sixteen  years, 
we  have  nothing  to  remark  except  that  there  was  still  a 
gradual  increase  in  the  importation  of  sperm  oil,  from  a 
greater  number  of  ships  being  employed  in  this  adven- 
turous trade,  to  which  every  year  added  fresh  experience, 
by  which  they  became  better  fitted  and  manned,  and 
therefore  the  more  qualified  to  war  with  and  capture  the 
“giant  of  the  main.” 

In  1819,  another  great  impulse  was  given  to  the 
fishery,  by  the  indefatigable  and  enterprising  Mr. 
Enderby,  who  had  not  only  joined  the  government  in 


150 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OE 


1793  in  the  expense  of  fitting  out  a ship,  commanded 
by  Captain  James  Colnett,  to  undertake  a voyage  to  the 
South  Seas,  with  a view  to  extend  the  sperm  whale  fishery 
there;  but  in  this  year,  1819,  formed  the  scheme,  and 
actually  fitted  out  at  his  own  expense  a large  ship  of 
500  tons  burthen,  called  the  “ Syren,”  commanded  by 
Captain  Coffin,  with  a crew  of  thirty-six  seamen,  for  the 
purpose  of  sending  her  on  an  experimental  voyage  to 
the  far  distant  sea  of  Japan,  to  prosecute  the  sperm 
whale  fishery  in  that  remote  part  of  the  world. 

The  “ Syren " sailed  from  England  on  the  3d  of 
August  1819,  and  arrived  off  the  coast  of  Japan  on  the 
5th  of  April  1820,  where  she  fell  in  with  immense  num- 
bers of  the  spermaceti  whale,  which  her  crew  gave  chase 
to  with  excellent  success  ; for  they  returned  to  their 
native  land,  on  the  21st  of  April  1822,  after  an  absence 
of  about  two  years  and  eight  months,  during  which  time 
they  had  by  their  industry,  courage,  and  perseverance 
gathered  from  the  confines  of  the  North  Pacific  Ocean 
no  less  than  the  enormous  quantity  of  three  hundred  and 
forty-six  tons  of  sperm  oil,  which  was  brought  into  the 
port  of  London  in  safety  and  triumph,  shewing  a success 
unprecedented  in  the  annals  of  whaling,  and  which 
astonished  and  stimulated  to  exertion  all  those  engaged 
in  the  trade  throughout  Europe  and  America.  The 
success  which  attended  this  expedition  not  only  rewarded 
the  seamen  and  others  who  composed  her  crew,  but  the 
spirited  owner  who  had  sent  them  out  also  must  have 
felt  the  solid  and  weighty  considerations  which  he  no 
doubt  received  in  return,  for  the  great  and  successful 
enterprise  to  which  he  had  given  origin. 


THE  SPERM  WHALE  FISHERY. 


151 


After  the  return  of  the  “Syren”  the  Japan  fishery 
was  speedily  established,  and  remains  to  this  day  the 
principal  one  of  both  Pacifies  ; and  although  it  has  been 
so  much  resorted  to  by  ships  of  different  nations  ever 
since,  which  have  carried  off  immense  quantities  of  sperm 
oil,  yet  such  is  the  boundless  space  of  ocean  throughout 
which  it  exists,  that  the  whales  scarcely  appear  to  be  re- 
duced  in  number.  But  they  are  much  more  difficult  to 
get  near  than  they  were  some  years  back,  on  account  of 
the  frequent  harassing  they  have  met  with  from  boats 
and  ships;  so  that  they  have  now  become  well  aware 
of  the  reckless  nature  of  their  pursuers,  and  they  evince 
great  caution  and  instinctive  cunning  in  avoiding  them* 
Notwithstanding  the  great  success  which  had  attended 
the  single-handed  yet  important  efforts  of  Mr.  Enderby, 
in  having  been  the  means  of  establishing  two  great 
fisheries,  by  which  numbers  of  persons  were  employed 
on  shore,  as  well  as  those  who  were  engaged  on  ship- 
board, his  enterprising  mind  still  continued  to  be 
prompted  by  the  laudable  ambition  of  discovering  others 
in  a far  different  portion  of  the  globe  to  either  of  the 
preceding.  With  this  view  he  fitted  out  the  “ Swan/' 
of  150  tons  burthen,  commanded  by  Captain  McClain, 
which  sailed  on  the  3d  of  June,  1823,  to  under- 
take a voyage  to  the  “ Seychelle  Islands/’  for  the  pur- 
pose of  searching  for  the  sperm  whale  ; directing  the 
captain  at  the  same  time  to  prosecute  the  fishery  if  pos- 
sible at  the  entrance  of  the  “ Red  Sea’*’  and  “ Persian 
Gulf;”  but  although  this  third  experimental  expedition 
did  not  prove  so  beneficial  to  the  crew  and  owner  as  the 


152 


RISE  AND  PROGRESS  OF 


two  former  had  done,  still  the  voyage  of  the  “ Swan’" 
to  those  places  had  the  effect  of  opening  the  new  fishery 
of  the  u Seychelles”  to  the  great  advantage  of  the 
commercial  interests  of  this  country,  which  was  mani- 
fested by  the  number  of  ships  which  soon  resorted  to  it 
for  the  purpose  of  whaling.  For  although  the  “ Swan  ” 
did  not  return  until  the  27th  of  April  1825,  and  had 
only  procured  forty  tons  of  sperm  oil  during  all  the  time 
of  her  absence,  yet  her  want  of  entire  success  was  not 
owing  to  the  absence  of  whales  at  the  places  to  which 
they  were  sent,  for  the  crew  saw  immense  numbers,  but 
from  a series  of  misfortunes  which  befei  them,  and 
which  rendered  them  incapable  of  prosecuting  the 
fishery  with  all  the  energy  and  entire  devotion  which  it 
requires  to  bring  about  a successful  termination.  The 
ship  which  resorted  to  the  “ Seychelles”  after  the  return 
of  the  “ Swan,”  had  good  reason  to  be  well  satisfied  with 
the  success  which  attended  their  efforts,  not  only  from  the 
number  of  whales  which  they  found  there,  but  from  its 
being  so  much  nearer  home  than  the  Japan  fishery,  by 
which  much  time  was  saved  in  the  outward  and  home- 
ward passages. 

During  the  year  1821,  the  government  finding  that 
the  sperm  whale  fishery  was  fully  established,  thought 
proper  to  discontinue  the  system  of  the  bounties — so 
that  the  crews  of  the  various  ships  which  resorted  to 
the  fisheries  were  made  to  depend  altogether  upon  the 
success  of  their  own  exertions. 

In  1823,  the  first  introduction  of  sperm  oil  from  the 
colonies  took  place,  the  principal  part  of  which  was 


THE  SPERM  WHALE  FISHERY. 


158 


brought  from  Sidney;  and  when  in  1836  the  imperial 
measure  was  introduced,  we  find  the  enormous  quantity 
of  sperm  oil  altogether  imported  into  London  during 
that  year,  amounted  to  6083  tons  ! while  the  ships  that 
were  employed  in  the  fishery  were  of  from  300  to  400 
tons. 

In  1827,  5552  tons  were  imported;  in  1828  there 
was  a great  decrease  in  the  supply,  as  only  3731  tons 
arrived;  but  in  1829  the  importation  again  increased 
to  5558  tons. 

In  the  year  1830,  from  some  cause  the  supply  was 
again  greatly  reduced,  as  only  4792  tons  were  imported ; 
but  in  the  following  year  of  1831,  the  importation  arose 
suddenly  to  its  maximum  height,  as  the  enormous 
quantity  of  7605  imperial  tons  were  introduced.  In 

1832  a slight  decrease  to  7165  tons  took  place,  and  in 

1833  a still  further  reduction  to  6057  tons ; but  in  1834 
it  rallied  again  slightly,  and  6731  tons  was  the  impor- 
tation. The  ships  engaged  at  this  time  in  the  fishery 
from  this  country,  were  about  ninety  in  number,  and 
from  300  to  400  tons  burthen,  the  average  duration  of 
their  voyages  being  three  years  and  three  months. 

In  the  year  1836,  7001  tons  were  imported,  by 
which  we  perceive  scarcely  any  or  no  diminution  in  the 
proceeds  of  the  fishery,  although  it  was  not  so  great 
as  in  the  successful  maximum  year  of  1831,  when  the 
importation  amounted  to  7601  imperial  tons,— a success 
which  still  stimulates  the  adventurer  in  this  “ most 
perilous  mode  of  hardy  industry.” 


154 


CHAPTER  XIL 

DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  BOATS,  WITH  THE  VARIOUS  IN- 
STRUMENTS, EMPLOYED  IN  THE  CAPTURE  OF 
THE  SPERM  WHALE* 


The  ships  which  are  employed  in  the  sperm  whale 
fishery,  are  generally  from  300  to  400  tons  burthen, 
having  crews  to  the  number  of  from  twenty-eight  to 
thirty-three  men  and  officers,  and  in  which  the  surgeon 
is  included.  They  sail  on  their  voyage  from  London 
at  all  times  of  the  year,  fully  provisioned  for  three 
years.  Each  vessel  carries  six  whale  boats,  which, 
being  the  principal  means  used  in  the  pursuit  and 
capture,  it  will  be  necessary  to  describe  fully.  They 
are  of  a construction  admirably  adapted  to  the  purposes 
for  which  they  are  intended,  combining  great  sharpness 


BOATS  AND  INSTRUMENTS,  ETC.  155 

of  form  for  swiftness  of  motion,  and  at  the  same  time 
considerable  buoyancy  and  stability,  to  enable  them  to 
resist  the  effects  of  a sometimes  rough  and  boisterous 
sea.  They  are  about  twenty-seven  feet  long,  by  four 
in  breadth  ; sharp  at  both  ends  for  motion  in  either 
direction  without  the  necessity  of  turning  ; near  that 
end  which  is  considered  the  stern  of  the  boat,  is  placed 
a strong  upright  rounded  piece  of  wood,  not  exactly  in 
the  centre,  called  the  “ loggerhead/5  at  the  other  end 
which  is  called  the  head,  is  a groove  exactly  in  the 
centre,  through  which  the  harpoon  line  runs  out.  To 
each  boat  are  allotted  two  lines  of  a peculiar  construc- 
tion, of  200  fathoms  in  length,  with  their  tubs,  into 
which  they  are  carefully  coiled  ready  for  use,— three  or 
four  harpoons,  two  or  three  lances,  a keg  containing  a 
lantern,  tinder-box,  and  other  small  articles,  to  procure 
light  in  case  of  being  benighted, — two  or  three  small 
flags,  called  “ whifts,”  which  are  inserted  in  the  dead 
whale,  in  case  the  boats  should  leave  it  in  chase  of 
others,  so  that  they  may  be  afterwards  more  readily 
found;  and  one  or  two  “ drougues/5  which  are  quadri- 
lateral pieces  of  board,  with  a central  handle  or  upright, 
by  which  they  are  attached  occasionally  to  the  harpoon 
line,  for  the  purpose  of  checking  in  some  degree  the 
speed  of  the  whale  in  sounding,  or  running. 

Each  boat  has  a crew  of  six  men,  two  of  whom  are 
called  the  “headsman55  and  “ boatsteerer/5  (see  cut,  p. 
154).  Four  of  these  boats  are  generally  used  in  the 
chase,  and  are  under  the  command  of  the  captain  and 
the  mates  respectively.  From  the  commencement  of 


] 56 


BOATS  AND  INSTRUMENTS 


the  voyage,  men  are  placed  at  each  mast-head,  who  are 
relieved  every  two  hours,  an  officer  is  also  placed  on  the 
fore-top-gallant-yard,  consequently  there  are  four  per- 
sons constantly  on  the  look-out  during  the  day,  from 
the  most  elevated  parts  of  the  ship.  From  the  com- 
mencement of  the  voyage  also,  all  utensils  and  instru- 
ments are  got  ready,  although  the  ships  are  frequently 
out  six  months  without  taking  or  even  seeing  a sperm 
whale,  while  on  the  other  hand  ships  have  sometimes, 
though  rarely,  fallen  in  with  them  close  to  the  mouth  of 
the  British  Channel. 

When  a whale  is  seen  by  any  of  the  look-outs,  he 
calls  in  a slow  and  peculiar  manner  “ there  she  spouts,” 
and  as  often  as  it  spouts  afterwards,  s<  there  again.”  It 
is  impossible  to  describe  the  excitement  and  agitation 
produced  by  this  welcome  intelligence ; the  listlessness 
produced  by  the  previous  monotony  of  a long,  and 
perhaps  hitherto  profitless  voyage,  is  shaken  off  among 
all  on  board  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest, — all  is  bustle 
and  animation,  some  rimling  up  the  shrouds  and  rigging 
to  observe  the  number,  distance,  and  position  of  the 
whale,  or  whales ; and  if  near  hand,  eagerly  leap  into 
the  boats,  and  pull  with  ardent  emulation  towards  their 
intended  victim.  If  the  whales  should  be  some  distance 
to  leeward,  endeavour  is  made  to  run  the  ship  within 
a quarter  of  a mile  of  them,— but  if  to  windward,  the 
boats  are  sent  in  chase ; an  arduous  task.  From  hour 
to  hour,  for  several  successive  risings  of  the  whale,  and 
sometimes  from  sunrise  to  sunset,  under  the  direct  rays 
of  a tropical  sun,  do  these  hardy  men  endure  the  utmost 


IN  THE  SPERM  WHALE  FISHERY. 


157 


suffering  and  fatigue  unheeded  and  almost  unfelt,  under 
the  eager  excitement  of  the  chase,  for  hope  supports 
their  minds.  The  crew  of  the  boat,  as  has  been  men- 
tioned, consists  of  the  headsman,  boatsteerer,  and  four 
hands ; of  these,  the  headsman,  who  has  the  command 
of  the  boat,  steers  it  until  the  whale  is  reached  and 
struck  with  the  harpoon.  The  boatsteerer  also,  at  this 
time  pulls  the  “ bow  oar,”  but  when  near  the  whale  he 
ceases  rowing,  quits  the  oar  and  strikes  the  harpoon 
into  the  animal,  the  line  attached  to  which  runs  between 
the  men  to  the  after  part  of  the  boat,  and  after  passing 
two  or  three  times  round  the  loggerhead,  is  continuous 
with  the  coils  lying  in  the  tubs  at  the  bottom  of  the 
boat.  The  boatsteerer  now  comes  aft,  and  steers  the 
boat  by  means  of  an  oar  passed  through  a ring  attached 
to  the  stern  called  a “ grummet,”  he  also  attends  the 
line  through  all  the  subsequent  operations ; the  heads- 
man at  the  same  time  passes  forwards,  and  takes  the 
station  at  the  head  of  the  boat,  prepared  to  plunge  his 
lance  into  the  body  of  the  whale  at  the  first  opportunity, 
and  it  requires  considerable  tact  and  experience  to  do 
this  in  the  most  effectual  manner,  which  will  be  more 
fully  described  in  the  following  chapter. 


158 


CHAPTER  XIIL 


CHASE  AND  CAPTURE  OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


More  exciting  and  magnificent  enterprise  cannot  be  conceived 
than  South-Sea  fishing.— -Monthly  Review  on  the  first  Edition. 

Although  ancient  and  modern  histories  may  abound 
in  descriptions  of  man’s  daring  by  “ flood  and  field/' 
and  of  the  accidents  and  escapes  which  accompany  his 
voluntary  exposure  to  a multitude  of  dangers,  surely  the 
recital  of  his  doings  in  the  chase  and  capture  of  the 
leviathan  of  the  deep— the  great  sperm  whale  -—can  be 
second  to  none  in  the  interest  it  must  excite  in  every 
contemplative  mind.  It  is  not  in  the  field,  jungle,  or 
thick  forest,  that  these  hardy  adventurers  seek  their 
prey,  upon  man’s  natural  element, — and  where,  should 
any  untoward  accident  occur,  assistance  of  some  kind 
can  be  readily  obtained*— but  on  the  vast  ocean,  at  times 
thousands  of  miles  distant  from  any  habitable  land, 
where  he  is  not  only  exposed  to  the  dangers  which  beset 
him  in  his  adventures  with  the  monster  of  the  deep,  but 
to  others  still  more  terrible,  in  which  the  ruthless  tem- 
pest of  the  China  and  Japanese  seas  form  no  inconsi- 
derable share ; or  when  near  lands,  distant  and  barba- 
rous, as  far  as  the  antipodes,  dangerous  reefs,  sunken 


CHASE  AND  CAPTURE,  ETC. 


159 


rocks,  and  relentless  savages  may  beset  him  on  every 
side,  requiring  all  the  moral  and  physical  energy  of 
which  our  nature  is  possessed,  to  escape  the  manifold 
dangers  which  surround  them,  but  which  the  whale 
fisherman  looks  upon  without  dread,  passing  among 
them  in  his  gallant  bark,  and  carrying  off  in  triumph  the 
rich  giant  of  the  ocean. 

When  in  pursuit  of  the  whale  with  the  boats,  it  occa- 
sionally happens  that  just  at  the  moment  the  harpoon  is 
about  to  be  plunged  into  its  body,  the  whale  suddenly 
descends,  leaving  nothing  hut  a vortex  to  mark  the  spot 
where  but  a moment  before  it  was  seen  floating  ; but  its 
course,  however,  has  been  observed,  and  the  boats  are 
placed  in  a position  to  be  as  near  as  possible  to  it  when  it 
again  rises  to  breathe ; the  time,  as  has  been  before  stated, 
when  he  will  do  this  is  known  to  a minute.  If  they  should 
be  more  fortunate  in  the  next  rising  of  the  whale,  and  they 
succeed  in  darting  the  harpoon  into  its  body,  then  imme- 
diately after  the  first  struggles  of  the  wounded  animal, 
and  when  he  is  lying  exhausted  from  his  enormous 
exertions  to  escape,  or  free  himself  from  the  harpoon,  the 
boat’s  head  is  placed  close  to  its  side,  and  the  headsman 
begins  to  destroy  it  by  thrusting  his  lance  into  its  most 
vital  parts,  which  lie  near  the  fin,  or  darting  at  it  from  a 
distance ; at  the  moment  of  lancing,  he  cries  “ stern 
all the  oars  are  then  immediately  backed,  and  the 
boat’s  stern  becoming  its  cutwater,  it  is  thus  removed 
from  danger  without  the  loss  of  time  and  trouble  in  turn- 
ing. Again,  when  feeling  the  lance,  the  whale  plunges 
and  throws  itself  in  all  directions,  lashing  the  water  with 


160 


CHASE  AND  CAPTURE 


its  tail,  or  rearing  its  enormous  head,  and  threatening 
destruction  with  its  formidable  jaw,  (see  cut,  p.  154). 

After  being  struck  with  the  harpoon  or  lance,  females 
and  young  bulls  make  the  most  violent  efforts  to  escape, 
and  being  remarkably  quick  in  their  actions  they  fre- 
quently afford  considerable  danger  and  trouble.  Those 
young  bulls  which  yield  about  forty  barrels  of  oil,  and 
are  consequently  called  forty-barrel  bulls,  are  perhaps 
the  most  difficult  to  destroy,  and  sometimes  make  great 
havoc  among  the  men  and  boats. 

The  large  whales,  such  as  make  eighty  or  more 
barrels,  not  being  nearly  so  active,  and  probably  not 
feeling  so  acutely,  are  generally,  by  expert  whalers, 
easily  killed,  and  with  less  damage  to  those  employed 
than  the  smaller  ones.  But  these  enormous  creatures 
are  sometimes  known  to  turn  upon  their  persecutors 
with  unbounded  fury,  destroying  everything  that  meets 
them  in  their  course — sometimes  by  the  powerful  blows 
of  their  flukes,  and  sometimes  attacking  with  the  jaw 
and  head.  Accidents  frequently  occur  from  the  violent 
convulsive  movements  of  a wounded  whale,  when  suffer- 
ing the  last  pangs  of  his  numerous  and  deep  wounds. 
When  the  lance  has  been  used  effectively,  so  as  to  wound 
some  important  vital  organ,  the  unfortunate  animal  fre- 
quently throws  up  blood  in  large  quantities  from  the 
blow-hole — becomes  convulsed— lashing  the  waves 
violently  with  its  tail— passing  very  rapidly  along- 
tinging  the  water  with  his  blood  as  he  swims  ; and  it  is 
a curious  fact,  that  under  these  circumstances  he  always 
describes  the  segment  of  a circle  : in  this  state  the  whale 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


161 


is  said  to  be  in  his  flurrv,  and  some  whalers  state  that 
he  always  dies  with  his  head  towards  the  sun,  but  of 
this  I have  never  been  convinced.  When  dead,  the 
body  always  turns  on  its  side,  probably  from  the  greater 
weight  of  the  spine  and  dorsal  muscles. 

In  calm  weather,  great  difficulty  is  sometimes  ex- 
perienced in  approaching  the  whale,  on  account  of 
the  quickness  of  his  sight  and  hearing— under  these 
circumstances  the  fishers  have  recourse  to  paddles 
instead  of  oars,  and  by  this  means  they  with  great 
caution  sometimes  get  near  enough  to  dart  the  harpoon 
with  success.  When  first  struck,  the  whale  frequently 
“ sounds,”  or  descends  to  an  amazing  depth,  taking 
out  perhaps  the  lines  belonging  to  the  four  boats,  800 
fathoms!  but  afterwards,  when  weakened  by  loss  of 
blood  and  fatigue,  he  becomes  unable  to  sound  to  any 
great  depth,  and  he  then  passes  rapidly  along  the  surface 
of  the  ocean,  towing  after  him  perhaps  three  or  four 
boats.  If  he  does  not  turn,  the  people  in  the  boats 
draw  in  the  line,  by  which  they  are  attached  to  the 
whale,  and  thus  easily  come  up  with  him  even  when 
going  with  great  velocity,  they  then  make  use  of  the 
lance  either  by  darting  or  thrusting,  and  so  destroying 
their  unoffending  victim. 

The  scenes  which  sometimes  occur  during  the  chase 
and  capture  of  this  whale  defy  description.  Let  the 
reader  suppose  himself  on  the  deck  of  a South-seaman, 
cruising  in  the  North  Pacific  Ocean  at  its  Japanese 
confine— he  may  be  musing  over  some  past  event,  the 


162 


CHASE  AND  CAPTURE 


ship  may  be  sailing  gently  along  over  the  smooth  ocean* 
every  thing  around  solemnly  still,  with  the  sun  pouring 
its  intense  rays  with  dazzling  brightness  ; suddenly* 
the  monotonous  quietude  is  broken  by  an  animated 
voice  from  the  mast-head,  exclaiming  “there  she  spouts.53 
The  captain  starts  on  deck  in  an  instant,  and  inquires 
“where  away ?”  but  perhaps  the  next  moment  every 
one  aloft  and  on  deck  can  perceive  an  enormous  whale 
lying  about  a quarter  of  a mile  from  the  ship,  on  the 
surface  of  the  sea,  having  just  come  up  to  breathe— his 
large  “hump55  projecting  three  feet  out  of  the  water, 
when  at  the  end  of  every  ten  seconds  the  spout  is  seen 
rushing  from  the  fore-part  of  his  enormous  head,  followed 
by  the  cry  of  every  one  on  board,  who  join  heart  and 
soul  in  the  chorus  of  “there  again !”  keeping  time  with 
the  duration  of  the  spout,  But  while  they  have  been 
looking,  a few  seconds  have  expired— they  rush  into  the 
boats,  which  are  directly  lowered  to  receive  them — and 
in  two  minutes  from  the  time  of  first  observing  the 
whale,  three  or  four  boats  are  down*  and  are  darting 
through  the  water  with  their  utmost  speed  towards  their 
intended  victim,  perhaps  accompanied  with  a song  from 
the  headsman,  who  urges  the  quick  and  powerful  plying 
of  the  oar,  with  the  common  whaling  chant,  of 

“ Away  my  boys,  away  my  boys,  ’t  is  time  for  us  to  go.” 

But  while  they  are  rushing  along,  the  whale  is 
breathing,  they  have  yet  perhaps  some  distance  to  pull 
before  they  can  get  a chance  of  striking  him  with  the 
harpoon.  His  “ spoutings  are  nearly  out,”  he  is  about 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE, 


163 


to  descend,  or  he  hears  the  boats  approaching.  The 
few  people  left  on  board,  and  who  are  anxiously  watch- 
ing the  whale  and  the  gradual  approach  of  the  boats, 
exclaim,  “ ah,  he  is  going  down !”  yet  he  spouts  again, 
but  slowly,  the  water  is  again  seen  agitated  around  him, 
the  spectators  on  board  with  breathless  anxiety  think 
they  perceive  his  “ small  ” rising  in  preparation  for  his 
descent ; “ he  will  be  lost,”  they  exclaim,  for  the  boats 
are  not  yet  near  enough  to  strike  him— -and  the  men  are 
still  bending  their  oars  in  each  boat  with  all  their 
strength,  to  claim  the  honour  of  the  first  blow  with  the 
harpoon.  The  bow-boat  has  the  advantage  of  being  the 
nearest  to  the  whale ; the  others,  for  fear  of  disturbing 
the  unconscious  monster,  are  now  doomed  to  drop 
astern.  One  more  spout  is  seen  slowly  curling  forth, 
— it  is  his  last,  this  rising,— his  “ small  ” is  bent,  his 
enormous  tail  is  expected  to  appear  every  instant, 
but  the  boat  shoots  rapidly  alongside  of  the  gigantic 
creature.  “ Peak  your  oars,”  exclaims  the  mate,  and 
directly  they  flourish  in  the  air  ; the  glistening  harpoon 
is  seen  above  the  head  of  the  harpooneer,  in  an  instant 
it  is  darted  with  unerring  force  and  aim,  and  is  buried 
deeply  in  the  side  of  the  huge  animal.  It  is  “ socket 
up;”  that  is,  it  is  buried  in  his  flesh  up  to  the  socket 
which  admits  the  handle  or  “pole”  of  the  harpoon. 
A cheer  from  those  in  the  boats,  and  from  the  seamen 
on  board,  reverberates  along  the  still  deep  at  the  same 
moment.  The  sea,  which  a moment  before  was  unruffled, 
now  becomes  lashed  into  foam  by  the  immense  strength 
of  the  wounded  whale,  w7ho  with  his  vast  tail  strikes  in 


164 


CHASE  AND  CAPTURE 


all  directions  at  his  enemies.  Now  his  enormous  head 
rises  high  into  the  air,  then  his  flukes  are  seen  lashing 
everywhere,  his  huge  body  writhes  in  violent  contor- 
tions from  the  agony  the  “iron”  has  inflicted.  The 
water  all  around  him  is  a mass  of  foam,  some  of  it  darts 
to  a considerable  height — the  sounds  of  the  blows  from 
his  tail  on  the  surface  of  the  sea,  can  be  heard  for  miles ! 
(s  ee  frontispiece  J. 

“ Stern  all,”  cries  the  headsman  ; but  the  whale  sud- 
denly disappears;  he  has  “sounded;”  the  line  is  running 
through  the  groove  at  the  head  of  the  boat,  with  light- 
ning-like velocity  ; it  smokes— it  ignites,  from  the  heat 
produced  by  the  friction,  but  the  headsman,  cool  and 
collected,  pours  water  upon  it  as  it  passes.  But  an  oar 
is  now  held  up  in  their  boat ; it  signifies  that  their  line 
is  rapidly  running  out ; two  hundred  fathoms  are  nearly 
exhausted  ; up  flies  one  of  the  other  boats,  and  “ bends 
on”  another  line,  just  in  time  to  save  that  which  was 
nearly  lost.  But  still  the  monster  descends ; he  is 
seeking  to  rid  himself  of  his  enemies  by  descending 
deeply  into  the  dark  and  unknown  depths  of  the  vast 
ocean.  They  next  bend  on  the  “ drougues,”  to  retard  his 
career, — but  he  does  not  turn  ; another  and  another  have 
but  slight  influence  in  checking  the  force  of  his  descent ; 
two  more  lines  are  exhausted,— he  is  six  hundred  fathoms 
deep ! “ Stand  ready  to  bend  on,”  cries  the  mate  to  the 

fourth  boat  (for  sometimes,  though  not  often,  they  take 
the  whole  four  lines  away  with  them — 800  fathoms!  !); 
but  it  is  not  required,  he  is  rising,  “ Haul  in  the  slack,” 
observes  the  headsman,  while  the  boatsteerer  coils  it 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


165 


again  carefully  into  the  tubs  as  it  is  drawn  up.  The 
whale  is  now  seen  approaching  the  surface ; the  gurgling 
and  bubbling  water  which  rises  before  also  proclaims  that 
he  is  near ; his  nose  starts  from  the  sea ; the  rushing 
spout  is  projected  high  and  suddenly,  from  his  agitation. 
The  “ slack  ” of  the  line  is  now  coiled  in  the  tubs,  and 
those  in  the  “ fast  ” boat  haul  themselves  gently  towards 
the  whale ; the  boatsteerer  places  the  headsman  close  to 
the  fin  of  the  trembling  animal,  who  immediately  buries 
his  long  lance  in  the  vitals  of  the  leviathan,  while,  at  the 
same  moment,  those  in  one  of  the  other  boats  dart 
another  harpoon  into  his  opposite  side,  when  “stern  all” 
is  again  vociferated,  and  the  boats  shoot  rapidly  away 
from  the  danger,  (s ee  frontispiece ) . 

Mad  with  the  agony  which  he  endures  from  these  fresh 
attacks,  the  infuriated  “ sea  beast”  rolls  over  and  over, 
and  coils  an  amazing  length  of  line  around  him  ; he  rears 
his  enormous  head,  and,  with  wide  expanded  jaw,  snaps 
at  everything  around ; he  rushes  at  the  boats  with  his 
head, “they  are  propelled  before  him  with  vast  swiftness, 
and  sometimes  utterly  destroyed. 

He  is  lanced  again,  "when  his  pain  appears  more  than 
he  can  bear ; he  throws  himself,  in  his  agony,  completely 
out  of  his  element ; the  boats  are  violently  jerked,  by 
which  one  of  the  lines  is  snapped  asunder ; at  the  same 
time  the  other  boat  is  upset,  and  its  crew  are  swimming 
for  their  lives.  The  whale  is  now  free ! he  passes  along 
the  surface  with  remarkable  swiftness,  “going  head  out;” 
but  the  two  boats  that  have  not  yet  “fastened,”  and  are 
fresh  and  free,  now  give  chase ; the  whale  becomes  ex  - 


166  CHASE  AND  CAPTURE 

hausted,  from  the  blood  which  flows  from  his  deep  and 
dangerous  wounds,  and  the  200  fathoms  of  line  belonging 
to  the  overturned  boat,  which  he  is  dragging  after  him 
through  the  water,  checks  him  in  his  course ; his  pur- 
suers again  overtake  him,  and  another  harpoon  is  darted 
and  buried  deeply  in  his  flesh. 

The  men  who  were  upset,  now  right  their  own  boat 
without  assistance  from  the  others,  by  merely  clinging  on 
one  side  of  her,  by  which  she  is  turned  over,  while  one 
of  them  gets  inside  and  bales  out  the  water  rapidly  wTith 
his  hat,  by  which  their  boat  is  freed,  and  she  is  soon 
again  seen  in  the  chase. 

The  fatal  lance  is  at  length  given,— the  blood  gushes 
from  the  nostril  of  the  unfortunate  animal  in  a thick  black 
stream,  which  stains  the  clear  blue  water  of  the  ocean  to 
a considerable  distance  around  the  scene  of  the  affray. 
In  its  struggles  the  blood  from  the  nostril  is  frequently 
thrown  upon  the  men  in  the  boats,  who  glory  in  its  show  ! 

The  immense  creature  may  now  again  endeavour  to 
“ sound  ” to  escape  from  his  unrelenting  pursuers  ; but 
it  is  powerless,— it  soon  rises  to  the  surface,  and  passes 
slowly  along  until  the  death  pang  seizes  it,  when  its 
appearance  is  awful  in  the  extreme. 

Suffering  from  suffocation,  or  some  other  stoppage  of 
some  important  organ,  the  whole  strength  of  its  enor- 
mous frame  is  set  in  motion  for  a fewr  seconds,  when  his 
convulsions  throw  him  into  a hundred  different  contor- 
tions of  the  most  violent  description,  by  which  the  sea 
is  beaten  into  foam,  and  boats  are  sometimes  crushed  to 
atoms,  with  their  crews,  {see  frontispiece). 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


167 


But  this  violent  action  being  soon  over,  the  now 
unconscious  animal  passes  rapidly  along,  describing  in 
his  rapid  course  a segment  of  a circle,  this  is  his 
u flurry,”  which  ends  in  his  sudden  dissolution.  And 
the  mighty  rencontre  is  finished  by  the  gigantic  animal 
rolling  over  on  its  side,  and  floating  an  inanimate  mass 
on  the  surface  of  the  crystal  deep, —a  victim  to  the 
tyranny  and  selfishness,  as  well  as  a wonderful  proof  of 
the  great  power  of  the  mind  of  man. 

In  the  afternoon  of  a day  which  had  been  rather 
stormy,  while  we  were  fishing  in  the  North  Pacific,  a 
“ school”  of  young  bull- whales  made  their  appearance 
close  to  the  ship,  and  as  the  weather  had  cleared  up  a 
little,  the  captain  immediately  ordered  the  mate  to  lower 
his  boat,  while  he  did  the  same  with  his  own,  in  order  to 
go  in  pursuit  of  them. 

The  two  boats  were  instantly  lowered,  for  we  were 
unable  to  send  more,  having  had  two  others  “ stove” 

rk 

the  day  before ; they  soon  got  near  the  whales,  but 
were  unfortunately  seen  by  them  before  they  could  get 
near  enough  to  dart  the  harpoon  with  any  chance  of 
success,  and  the  consequence  was  that  the  “ pod”  of 
whales  separated,  and  went  off  with  great  swiftness  in 
different  directions.  One  however,  after  making  several 
turns,  came  at  length  right  towards  the  captain’s  boat, 
which  he  observing,  waited  in  silence  for  his  approach 
without  moving  an  oar,  so  that  the  (i  young  bull”  came 
close  by  his  boat,  and  received  the  blow  of  the  harpoon 
some  distance  behind  his  “ hump,”  which  I saw  enter 


168 


CHASE  AND  CAPTURE 


his  flesh  myself,  as  it  occurred  close  to  the  ship.  The 
whale  appeared  quite  terror-struck  for  a few  seconds, 
and  then  suddenly  recovering  itself,  darted  off  like  the 
wind,  and  spun  the  boat  so  quickly  round  when  the 
tug  came  upon  the  line,  that  she  was  within  a miracle  of 
being  upset.  But  away  they  went,  “ dead  to  windward,” 
at  the  rate  of  twelve  or  fifteen  miles  an  hour,  right 
against  a “ head  sea,”  which  flew  against  and  over  the 
bows  of  the  boat  with  uncommon  force,  so  that  she  at 
times  appeared  ploughing  through  it,  making  a high 
bank  of  surf  on  each  side. 

The  second  mate,  having  observed  the  course  of  the 
whale  and  boat,  managed  to  waylay  them,  and  when 
they  came  near  to  him,  which  they  speedily  did,  a 
“ short  warp”  was  thrown,  and  both  boats  were  soon 
towed  at  nearly  the  same  rate  as  the  captain’s  boat  had 
been  before. 

I now  saw  the  captain  darting  the  lance  at  the  whale 
as  it  almost  flew  along,  but  he  did  not  seem  to  do  so 
with  any  kind  of  effect,  as  the  speed  of  the  whale  did 
not  appear  in  the  least  diminished,  and  in  a very  short 
time  they  all  disappeared  together,  being  at  too  great  a 
distance  to  be  seen  with  the  naked  eye  from  the  deck. 
I now  ran  aloft,  and  with  the  aid  of  a telescope  could 
just  discern  from  the  mast-head  the  three  objects,  like 
specks  upon  the  surface  of  the  ocean,  at  an  alarming 
distance.  I could  just  observe  the  two  boats,  with  the 
whale’s  head  occasionally  darting  out  before  them,  with 
a good  deal  of  “ white  water”  or  foam  about  them, 
which  convinced  me  that  the  whale  was  still  running. 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


169 


I watched  them  with  the  glass  until  I could  no  longer 
trace  them,  even  in  the  most  indistinct  manner,  and 
I then  called  to  those  on  deck,  that  they  might  take 
the  bearing  by  compass,  of  the  direction  in  which  I had 
lost  sight  of  them,  that  we  might  continue  to  “ beat” 
the  ship  up  to  that  quarter. 

It  was  now  within  half-an-hour  of  sunset,  and  there 
was  every  appearance  of  the  coming  on  of  an  “ugly 
night,”  as  a seaman  would  say  ; indeed  the  wind  began 
to  freshen  every  moment,  and  an  “ awkward  bubble  ” of  a 
sea  soon  began  to  make.  I remained  aloft  until  I saw  the 
sun  dip,  angry  and  red,  below  the  troubled  horizon,  and 
was  just  about  to  descend  when  I was  dreadfully  shocked 
at  hearing  the  loud  cry  of  “ a man  overboard  ” from  all 
upon  deck.  I immediately  looked  astern,  and  saw  one 
of  our  men,  of  the  name  of  Berry,  grappling  with  the 
waves  and  calling  loudly  for  help.  The  ship  was  soon 
brought  round ; but  in  doing  so  she  unavoidably  passed 
a long  way  from  the  poor  fellow,  who  still  supported 
himself  by  beating  the  water  with  his  hands,  although 
he  was  quite  unacquainted  with  the  proper  art  of  swim- 
ming. Several  oars  were  thrown  overboard  the  moment 
after  he  fell,  but  he  could  not  reach  them,  though  they 
were  near  to  him  ; and  directly  the  ship  was  brought 
up,  a Sandwich  islander,  who  formed  one  of  the  crew, 
leaped  overboard  and  swam  towards  him,  while  at  the 
same  time  the  people  on  the  deck  were  lowering  a spare 
boat,  which  is  always  kept  for  such  emergencies.  I 
could  be  of  no  service,  except  to  urge  their  expedition 
by  my  calls,  for  it  was  all  only  the  work  of  a few 


i 


170 


CHASE  AND  CAPTURE 


minutes.  The  good  Sandwich  islander  struck  out  most 
bravely  at  first ; but  in  a short  time,  finding  that  he 
was  some  distance  from  the  ship,  and  being  unable  to 
see  Berry,  on  account  of  the  agitated  surface  of  the  sea, 
actually  turned  back  through  fear— finding,  as  he  said, 
that  the  “ sea  caps  went  over  his  head.  The  men  in 
the  boat  now  plied  their  oars  with  all  their  strength, 
and  were  making  rapidly  towards  the  drowning  young 
man,  who  now  and  then  disappeared  entirely  from  view 
under  the  heavy  seas  which  'were  beginning  to  roll; 
a sickening  anxiety  pervaded  me,  as  my  thoughts 
appeared  to  press  the  boat  onwards  to  the  spot  where 
the  poor  fellow  still  grappled,  but  convulsively,  with 
the  yielding  waters.  The  boat,  urged  by  man’s  utmost 
strength,  sprang  over  the  boisterous  waves  with  consi- 
derable speed  ; but  they  arrived  half  a minute  too  late 
to  save  our  poor  shipmate  from  his  watery  grave.  I 
saw  him  struggle  with  the  waves  until  the  last,  when 
the  foam  of  a broken  sea  roared  over  him,  and  caused 
him  to  disappear  for  ever!  The  boat  was  rowed  round 
and  round  the  fatal  spot,  again  and  again,  until  night 
fell,  and  then  she  was  slowly  and  reluctantly  pulled  to 
the  ship  by  her  melancholy  crew.  As  they  returned, 
the  turbulent  waves  tossed  them  about,  as  if  in  sport, 
dashing  its  spray  at  times  completely  over  them,  making 
the  boat  resound  from  the  beating  of  the  dashing  waters 
which  flew  against  her  bow. 

The  moment  the  unfortunate  seaman  disappeared,  a 
large  bird  of  the  albatros  kind  came  careering  along, 
and  alighted  on  the  water  at  the  very  spot  in  which  the 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


171 


poor  fellow  was  last  seen.  It  was  a curious  circum- 
stance, and  only  served  to  heighten  our  horror,  when 
we  saw  this  carnivorous  bird  seat  itself  proudly  over  the 
head  of  our  companion,  and  which  also  served  to  remind 
us  of  the  number  of  sharks  that  we  had  so  frequently 
seen  of  late,  of  the  horrible  propensities  of  which  we 
could  not  dare  to  think. 

By  the  time  we  had  hoisted  in  the  boat  it  was  quite 
dark ; the  winds  too  had  increased  to  half  a gale,  with  heavy 
squalls  at  times,  so  that  we  were  obliged  to  double-reef 
our  topsails.  Our  painful  situation  now  bore  most  heavily 
upon  us.  We  had  lost  one  of  our  men,  who  had  sailed 
with  us  from  England — the  bare  thought  of  which  in  our 
circumstances  aroused  a crowd  of  heart-rending  ideas. 
Our  captain  and  second  mate,  with  ten  of  the  crew,  had 
also  disappeared,  and  were  by  this  time  all  lost,  or  were 
likely  to  be  so  in  the  stormy  night  which  had  now  set 
in ; being  too  several  hundred  miles  away  from  any  land. 
We,  however,  kept  beating  the  ship  to  windward  con- 
stantly, carrying  all  the  sail  that  she  could  bear,  making 
“ short  boards”  or  putting  the  ship  about  every  twenty 
minutes.  We  had  also,  since  nightfall,  continued  to  burn 
blue  lights,  and  we  had  likewise  a large  vessel  containing 
oil  and  unravelled  rope,  burning  over  the  sternrail  of  the 
ship  as  a beacon  for  them,  which  threw  out  a great  light. 
But  although  all  eyes  were  employed  in  every  direction 
searching  for  the  boats,  no  vestige  of  them  could  be  seen ; 
and  therefore  when  half-past  nine  p.m.  came,  we  made 
up  our  minds  that  they  were  all  lost ; and  as  the  wind 
howled  hoarsely  through  the  rigging,  and  the  waves  beat 


172 


CHASE  AND  CAPTURE 


savagely  against  our  ship,  some  of  us  thought  we  could 
hear  the  shrieks  of  poor  Berry  above  the  roaring  of  the 
storm  ; others  imagined  in  their  melancholy,  that  they 
could  occasionally  hear  the  captain's  voice,  ordering  the 
ship  to  “ bear  up,”  while  the  boats  had  been  seen  more 
than  fifty  times  by  anxious  spirits,  who  had  strained 
their  eyes  through  the  gloom  until  fancy  robbed  them 
of  their  true  speculation  and  left  her  phantasmagoria  in 
exchange.  There  were  not  many  on  board  who  did  not 
think  of  home  on  that  dreadful  night— there  were  not 
many  among  us  who  did  not  curse  the  sea,  and  all 
sea-going  avocations  ; while,  with  the  same  breath,  they 
blessed  the  safe  and  cheerful  fireside  of  their  parents  and 
friends  who  resided  at  home,  and  which  at  that  moment 
they  would  have  given  all  they  possessed  but  to  see. 
But  at  the  moment  despair  was  firmly  settling  upon  us, 
a man  from  aloft  called  out  that  he  could  see  a light 
right  a head  of  the  ship,  just  as  we  were  “going  about,” 
by  which  we  should  have  gone  from  it.  We  all  looked 
in  that  direction,  and  in  a few  minutes  we  could  plainly 
perceive  it ; in  a short  time  we  were  close  up  with  it, 
wrhen,  to  our  great  joy,  we  found  the  captain  and  all  the 
men  in  the  boats,  lying  to  leeward  of  the  dead  whale, 
which  had  in  some  measure  saved  them  from  the 
violence  of  the  sea.  They  had  only  just  been  able  to 
procure  a light,  having  unfortunately  upset  all  their 
tinder  through  the  violent  motion  of  the  boats,  by  which 
it  became  wret— but  which  they  succeeded  in  igniting 
after  immense  application  of  the  flint  and  steel — or  their 
lantern  would  have  been  suspended  from  an  oar  directly 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


173 


after  sunset,  which  is  the  usual  practice  when  boats  are 
placed  under  such  circumstances. 

After  having  secured  the  whale  alongside,  and  which 
we  expected  to  lose  during  the  night  from  the  roughness 
of  the  weather,  they  all  came  on  board,  when  the  mis- 
fortune of  poor  Berry  was  spoken  of  with  sorrow  from 
all  hands,  while  the  joy  of  their  own  deliverance  served 
to  throw  a ray  of  light  amidst  the  gloom. 


On  the  morning  of  the  18th  June,  1832,  while  we 
were  still  fishing  in  the  “ off-shore  ground”  of  Japan,  we 
fell  in  with  an  immense  sperm  whale,  which  happened 
to  be  just  the  sort  of  one  we  required  to  complete  our 
cargo.  Three  boats  were  immediately  lowered  to  give 
him  chase ; but  the  whale,  from  some  cause  or  other, 
appeared  wild  in  its  actions  long  before  it  had  seen  any 
of  our  boats,  although  it  might  have  been  chased  the 


174 


CHASE  AND  CAPTURE 


day  before  by  some  other  ship.  It  was  greatly  different 
in  its  actions  to  most  other  large  whales,  because  it  never 
went  steadily  upon  one  course.  If  he  “ peaked  his 
flukes,”  or  went  down  going  to  the  southward,  we  ex- 
pected he  would  continue  that  course  under  water,  but 
when  he  again  rose  perhaps  he  was  two  or  three  miles 
away  from  the  boats  to  the  northward ; in  this  sort  of 
manner  he  dodged  us  about  until  near  four  p.m.,  at  which 
time  the  men  were  dreadfully  exhausted  from  their  ex- 
ertions in  the  chase,  which  had  been  conducted  under  a 
broiling  sun,  with  the  thermometer  standing  in  the  shade 
at  93°.  About  half-past  four,  however,  Captain  Swain 
contrived,  by  the  most  subtle  management  and  great 
physical  exertions,  to  get  near  to  the  monster,  when  he 
immediately  struck  him  with  the  harpoon  with  his  own 
hands ; and,  before  he  had  time  to  recover  from  the 
blow,  he  managed  with  his  usual  dexterity  to  give  him 
two  fatal  wounds  wTith  the  lance,  which  caused  the  blood 
to  flow  from  the  blow-hole  in  abundance.  The  whale, 
after  the  last  lance,  immediately  descended  below  the 
surface,  and  the  captain  felt  certain  that  he  was  going  to 
“ sound,”  but  in  this  he  was  much  mistaken — for  a few 
minutes  after  his  descent  he  again  rose  to  the  surface 
with  great  velocity,  and  striking  the  boat  with  the  front 
part  of  his  head  threw  it  high  into  the  air  with  the  men 
and  everything  contained  therein,  fracturing  it  to  atoms 
and  scattering  its  crew  widely  about.  While  the  men 
were  endeavouring  to  save  themselves  from  drowning 
by  clinging  to  their  oars  and  pieces  of  the  wreck  of  the 
boat,  the  enormous  animal  was  seen  swimming  round 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


175 


and  round  them,  appearing  as  if  meditating  an  attack 
with  his  flukes,  which  if  he  had  thought  proper  to  do, 
in  return  for  the  grievous  wounds  that  he  had  himself 
received,  a few  strokes  of  his  ponderous  tail  would  soon 
have  destroyed  his  enemies ; but  this  was  not  attempted. 
They  had  now  nothing  to  hope  for  but  the  arrival  of  the 
other  boats  to  relieve  them  from  their  dangerous  situation, 
rendered  more  so  by  the  appearance  of  several  large 
sharks,  attracted  by  the  blood  which  flowed  from  the 
whale,  which  were  sometimes  only  a few  feet  from  them ; 
and  also  from  the  inability  of  one  of  the  boats’  crew  to 
swim,  by  which  three  or  four  of  his  mates  were  much 
exhausted  in  their  efforts  to  save  him,  which  they  suc- 
ceeded in  doing  after  having  lashed  two  or  three  oars 
across  the  stern  of  the  boat,  which  happened  to  be  not 
much  fractured,  on  which  they  placed  their  helpless 
fellow -adventurer.  After  they  bad  remained  in  the  water 
about  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  assisting  themselves  by 
clinging  to  pieces  of  the  wreck,  one  of  the  other  boats 
arrived  and  took  them  in,  no  doubt  greatly  to  their  relief 
and  satisfaction.  But  although  these  brave  whale  fisher- 
men had  been  so  defeated,  they  were  not  subdued:  fch-o 
moment  they  entered  the  boat  which  took  them  from 
the  ocean,  their  immediate  determination  was  for  another 
attack  upon  the  immense  creature,  which  remained 
close  by,  while  the  other  boat,  which  was  pulling 
towards  them  with  all  the  strength  of  its  rowers,  would 
still  be  a quarter  of  an  hour  before  it  could  arrive. 

Captain  Swain,  with  twelve  men  in  one  boat,  there- 
fore made  another  attack  upon  the  whale  with  the  lance, 


176 


CHASE  AND  CAPTURE 


which  caused  it  to  throw  up  blood  from  the  blow -hole 
in  increased  quantities.  We,  who  were  on  board  the 
ship,  and  had  observed  from  a great  distance,  by  means 
of  the  telescope,  the  whole  of  the  occurrence,  were 
employed  in  beating  the  ship  towards  them,  but  they 
were  far  to  windward,  and  the  wind  being  rather  light, 
we  had  even  our  royal  sails  set.  Soon  after  the  arrival 
of  the  third  boat,  the  whale  went  into  its  flurry  and  soon 
died,  when,  to  the  dismay  of  the  boats9  crews,  who  had 
endured  so  much  danger  and  hardship  in  its  capture, 
it  sunk,  and  never  rose  again, —an  occurrence  which  is 
not  very  unfrequent,  owing  of  course  to  the  greater 
specific  gravity  of  the  individual,  perhaps  from  a greater 
development  of  bony  and  muscular  structures.  Such 
were  the  adventures  of  that  day,  in  the  evening  of  which 
the  crews  returned  to  the  ship,  worn  out  and  dispirited, 
having  lost  a favourite  boat,  with  the  whole  of  her 
instruments,  besides  the  last  whale  wanted  to  complete 
the  cargo,  and  worth  at  least  500/. ! (see  cut,  p.  173.) 

At  day-break,  one  fine  morning  in  August,  as  our 
first  mate  was  going  aloft,  to  look  out  for  whales,  he 
discovered  no  less  than  three  ships  within  a mile  of  us ; 
but  they  were  situated  in  various  directions.  We  soon 
discovere/i  them  to  be  whalers,  who  like  ourselves  were 
cruising  after  the  spermaceti  whale,  and  therefore  their 
appearance  only  had  the  effect  of  redoubling  our  vigi- 
lance in  the  “ look-out,”  so  that  we  might  if  possible 
be  the  first,  to  obtain  the  best  chance  if  one  of  those 
creatures  “ hove  in  sight.’9  And  it  was  not  long  before 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


177 


a very  large  whale  made  his  appearance  right  in  among 
the  ships.  The  water  was  smooth  at  the  time,  for  we 
had  but  a light  air  of  wind  stirring,  so  that  our  boats 
were  instantly  lowered  without  the  loss  of  time  of  bring- 
ing the  “ ship  to.”  But  although  we  managed  matters 
as  quietly  and  secretly  as  possible,  we  found  the 
moment  our  boats  cleared  the  ship’s  side,  that  all  the 
others  had  been  as  vigilant  as  ourselves,  and  had  also 
lowered  their  boats  after  the  whale.  The  whole  of 
them  immediately  began  the  chase,—- nine  boats  in  all, 
being  three  from  each  ship.  They  all  exerted  them- 
selves to  their  utmost,  and  as  we  expected,  in  vain ; for 
before  any  of  the  boats  had  got  even  near  him,  the 
enormous  animal  lifted  his  widely  expanded  flukes,  and 
descended  perpendicularly  into  the  depths  of  the  ocean 
to  feed.  Those  in  the  boats,  however,  having  noticed 
his  course,  proceeded  onwards,  thinking  the  whale 
would  continue  to  pursue  the  same  direction  under 
water ; but  as  he  was  going  slowly  at  the  time  he  was 
up,  they  did  not  proceed  more  than  a mile  from  the 
place  at  which  he  descended  before  they  separated  about 
a hundred  yards  from  each  other,  and  then  “peaking  59 
their  oars,  all  the  men  in  each  boat  stood  up,  looking 
in  different  directions,  so  as  to  catch  the  first  appearance 
of  the  spout  when  the  whale  again  rose  to  breathe : when 
an  hour  after  his  descent  had  expired,  the  excitement 
among  us  who  were  on  board  the  ship,  became  wound 
up  to  its  highest  pitch.  The  captain,  who  had  remained 
on  board,  ascended  to  the  fore- top-gallant-yard  to  watch 
the  manoeuvres  of  the  boats,  and  for  the  purpose  of  the 

i 2 


178 


CHASE  AND  CAPTURE 


better  ordering  the  signals  to  them,  or  working  of  the 
ship.  All  those  who  were  down  after  the  whale,  ap- 
peared as  feverish  with  anxiety  as  ourselves,  for  every 
now  and  then  they  were  to  be  seen  shifting  their  posi» 
tions  a little,  thinking  to  do  so  with  advantage ; then 
they  would  cease  rowing,  and  stand  upon  the  seats  of 
the  boats,  and  look  all  round  over  the  smooth  surface  of 
the  ocean  with  ardent  gaze.  But  one  hour  and  ten 
minutes  expired  before  the  monster  of  the  deep  thought 
proper  to  break  cover,  and  when  he  did,  then  a rattling 
chase  commenced  with  the  whole  of  the  boats,  and  they 
really  flew  along  in  fine  style,  some  of  them  actually 
appearing  to  be  lifted  quite  on  the  surface  of  the  water 
from  the  great  power  of  the  rowers ; and  we  had  the 
satisfaction  of  observing,  that  our  boats  were  quite 
equal  to  the  others  in  the  speed  with  which  they  were 
propelled.  But  it  was  again  a useless  task,  as  the  old 
“ schoolmaster  ” had  outwitted  those  in  the  boats,  by 
having  gone— while  under  water— much  further  than 
any  of  his  pursuers  had  anticipated,  and  they  again  had 
the  mortification  of  witnessing  the  turning  of  his  flukes 
as  he  once  more  descended  into  the  depths  of  his  vast 
domain.  We  now  knew  to  a minute  the  time  that  he 
would  remain  below,  while  the  people  in  the  boats  con- 
tinued to  row  slowly  onwards  the  whole  time.  A fine 
breeze  now  sprang  up,  so  that  we  wTere  enabled  to  keep 
company  with  the  boats,  keeping  a little  to  windward  of 
them,  as  the  whale  was  going  “ on  a wind,”  as  a sea- 
man would  say,  meaning  that  it  was  blowing  across 
him. 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


179 


When  the  hour  and  ten  minutes  had  again  nearly  past, 
the  nine  boats  were  nearly  abreast  of  each  other,  and  not 
much  separated,  so  that  the  success  of  first  striking  the 
whale  depended  very  much  upon  the  swiftest  boat,  espe- 
cially if  the  whale  carne  up  a-head.  We  had  now  all 
the  boats  on  our  “lee  beam,”  while  the  ships  were  all 
astern  of  us,  the  most  distant  not  being  more  than  half 
a mile*,  so  that  we  enjoyed  an  excellent  view  of  this  most 
exciting  and  animated  scene.  True  to  his  time,  the 
leviathan  at  length  arose  right  a-head  of  the  boats,  and 
at  not  more  than  a quarter  of  a mile  distant  from  them. 
The  excitement  among  the  crews  of  the  various  boats 
when  they  saw  his  first  spout  was  tremendous ; they  did 
not  shout,  but  we  could  hear  an  agitated  murmur  from 
their  united  voices  reverberating  along  the  surface  of  the 
deep.  They  flew  over  the  limpid  waves  at  a rapid  rate  ; 
the  mates  of  the  various  boats  cheered  their  respective 
crews  by  various  urgent  exclamations,  “Swing  on  your 
oars  my  boys,  for  the  honour  of  the  Henrietta,”  cried 
one  ; “ Spring  away,  hearties,”  shouted  another,  and  yet 
scarcely  able  to  breathe  from  anxiety  and  exertion.  “ It’s 
our  fish,”  vociferated  a third,  as  he  passed  the  rest  of  his 
opponents  but  a trifling  distance.  “ Lay  on  my  boys,” 
cried  young  Clark,  our  first  mate,  as  he  steered  the  boat 
with  one  hand,  and  pressed  down  the  after  oar  with  the 
other.  “ She’ll  be  ours  yet ; let’s  have  a strong  pull,  a 
long  pull,  and  a pull  altogether,”  he  exclaimed,  as  he 
panted  from  his  exertions  at  the  after  oar,  which  soon 
brought  up  his  boat  quite  abreast  of  the  foremost. 

But  the  giant  of  the  ocean,  who  was  only  a short  dis- 


180 


CHASE  AND  CAPTURE 


tance  before  them,  now  appeared  rather  “gallied,”  or 
frightened,  having  probably  seen  or  heard  the  boats,  and 
as  he  puffed  up  his  spout  to  a great  height,  and  reared 
his  enormous  head,  he  increased  his  speed,  and  went 
along  quite  as  fast  as  the  boats,— but  for  only  two  or 
three  minutes,  when  he  appeared  to  get  perfectly  quiet 
again,  while  the  boats  gained  rapidly  upon  him,  and  were 
soon  close  in  his  “ wake.”  “ Stand  up,”  cried  young 
Clark  to  the  harpooneer,  who  is  also  the  bow-oarsman, 
while  the  same  order  was  instantly  given  by  his  opponent, 
whose  boat  was  abreast  of  our  mate's,  with  the  rest  close 
to  their  sterns.  The  orders  were  instantly  obeyed,  for 
in  a second  of  time  both  boatsteerers  stood  in  the  bows 
of  their  respective  boats,  with  their  harpoons  held  above 
their  heads  ready  for  the  dart ; but  they  both  panted  to 
be  a few  yards  nearer  to  the  whale,  to  do  so  with  success. 
The  monster  ploughed  through  the  main  quickly,  but 
the  boats  gained  upon  him  every  moment,  when  the 
agitation  of  all  parties  became  intense,  and  a general  cry 
of  “dart!  dart!”  broke  from  the  hindermost  boats,  who 
each  urged  their  friends,  fearful  of  delay.  The  uproar 
became  excessive,  and  while  the  tumult  of  voices,  and 
the  working  and  splashing  of  the  oars,  rolled  along  the 
surface  of  the  deep,  both  the  harpooneers  darted  their 
weapons  together,  which,  if  they  had  both  struck  the 
whale,  would  have  originated  a contention  between  them 
regarding  their  claims.  But,  as  it  happened,  neither  of 
them  had  that  good  fortune ; for  at  the  moment  of  their 
darting  the  harpoons,  the  whale  descended  like  a shot, 
and  avoided  their  infliction,  leaving  nothing  but  a white- 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


181 


and-green-looking  vortex  in  the  disturbed  blue  ocean,  to 
mark  the  spot  where  his  monstrous  form  so  lately  floated. 
A general  huzza  burst  from  the  sternmost  boats  when 
they  saw  the  issue  of  this  chase,  thinking  now  that 
another  chance  awaited  them  on  the  next  rising  of  the 
whale,  and  they  soon  began  to  separate  themselves  a 
little,  and  to  row  onwards  again  in  the  course  which  they 
thought  he  had  taken.  Our  captain,  feeling  irritated  at 
the  ill-success  of  the  mate,  now  ordered  his  own  boat  to 
be  lowered,  intending  to  make  one  in  the  chase  himself; 
but,  just  as  he  had  parted  from  the  ship,  going  down  a 
little  to  leeward,  a tremendous  shout  arose  from  the 
people  in  our  own  boats,  joined  with  a loud  murmuring 
from  the  rest  of  the  boats’  crews  ; for  the  whale,  not 
having  had  all  its  “ spoutings  out,”  had  now  risen  again 
to  finish  them,  and  was  coming  to  windward  at  a quick 
rate,  right  towards  our  ship.  The  captain  saw  his  favour- 
able situation  in  a moment,  and  passing  quickly  to  the 
bows  of  the  boat,  he  stood  to  waylay  him  as  he  came 
careering  along,  throwing  his  enormous  head  completely 
out  of  the  water,  for  he  was  now  quite  “gallied.”  He 
soon  came,  and  caught  a sight  of  the  boat  just  as  he  got 
within  dart ; the  vast  animal  rolled  itself  over  in  an 
agony  of  fear,  to  alter  its  course ; but  it  was  too  late,  the 
harpoon  was  hurled  with  excellent  aim,  and  was  plunged 
deeply  into  his  side  near  the  fin. 

As  the  immense  creature  almost  flew  out  of  the  water 
from  the  blow,  throwing  tons  of  spray  high  into  the 
air,  shewing  that  he  was  “ fast,”  a triumphant  cheering 
arose  from  those  in  our  own  boats,  as  well  as  from  those 


182 


CHASE  AND  CAPTURE 


in  the  ship*  accompanied  by  exclamations  loud  and 
deep,  and  not  of  the  most  favourable  kind  to  us,  from 
all  the  rest.  But  onwards  they  all  came,  and  soon 
cheerfully  rendered  assistance  to  complete  its  destruc- 
tion ; but  which  was  not  done,  however,  without  consi- 
derable difficulty,  the  whale  continuing  to  descend  the 
moment  either  of  the  boats  got  nearly  within  dart  of 
him.  But  after  an  hour's  exertion  in  this  way,  six  out 
of  the  ten  boats  which  were  now  engaged  got  fast  to 
him  by  their  harpoons,  but  not  one  of  them  could  get 
near  enough  to  give  him  a fatal  lance  ; he  towed  them 
all  in  various  directions  for  some  time,  taking  care  to 
descend  below  the  surface  the  moment  a boat  drew 
up  over  his  flukes,  or  otherwise  drew  near,  which  ren- 
dered it  almost  impossible  to  strike  him  in  the  body, 
even  when  the  lance  was  darted,  although  the  after  part 
of  his  small’5  was  perforated  in  a hundred  places  : from 
these  wounds  the  blood  gushed  in  considerable  quanti- 
ties, and  as  the  poor  animal  moved  along,  towing  the 
boats,  he  left  a long  ensanguined  stain  in  the  ocean. 
At  last,  becoming  weak  from  his  numerous  and  deep 
wounds,  he  became  less  capable  of  avoiding  his  foes, 
which  gave  an  opportunity  for  one  of  them  to  pierce 
him  to  the  life ! — dreadful  was  that  moment  the  acute 
pain  which  the  leviathan  experienced,  and  which  roused 
the  dormant  energies  of  his  gigantic  frame.  As  the 
life’s  blood  gurgled  thick  through  the  nostril,  the  im- 
mense creature  went  into  his  “ flurry”  with  excessive 
fury,  the  boats  were  speedily  sterned  off,  while  he  beat 
the  water  in  his  dying  convulsions  with  a force  that 
appeared  to  shake  the  firm  foundation  of  the  ocean ! 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


183 


Numberless  stories  are  told  of  fighting  whales,  many 
of  which  however,  are  probably  much  exaggerated 
accounts  of  the  real  occurrences.  A large  whale,  called 
“ Timor  Jack”  is  the  hero  of  many  strange  stories,  such 
as  of  his  destroying  every  boat  which  was  sent  out 
against  him,  until  a contrivance  was  made  by  lashing  a 
barrel  to  the  end  of  the  harpoon  with  which  he  was 
struck,  and  whilst  his  attention  was  directed  and  divided 
amongst  several  boats,  means  were  found  of  giving  him 
his  death  wound. 

In  the  year  1804,  the  ship  “ Adonis,”  being  in  com- 
panv  with  several  others,  struck  a large  whale  off  the 
coast  of  New  Zealand,  which  “ stove”  or  destroyed  nine 
boats  before  breakfast,  and  the  chase  consequently  wac 
necessarily  given  up.  After  destroying  boats  belonging 
to  many  ships,  this  whale  was  at  last  captured,  and 
many  harpoons  of  the  various  ships  that  had  from  time 
to  time  been  sent  out  against  him  were  found  sticking  in 
his  body.  This  whale  was  called  “ New  Zealand  Tom,” 
and  the  tradition  is  carefully  preserved  by  whalers. 

Accidents  of  the  most  fearful  nature  have  frequently 
occurred  in  this  hazardous  pursuit,  which  to  enumerate 
would  fill  the  space  of  volumes ; — for  not  only  boats, 
but  sometimes  even  ships  have  been  destroyed  by  these 
powerful  creatures.  It  is  a well  authenticated  fact,  that 
an  American  whale-ship  called  the  u Essex  ” was  de- 
stroyed in  the  South  Pacific  Ocean  by  an  enormous 
sperm  whale.  While  the  greater  part  of  the  crew  w'ere 
away  in  the  boats,  pursuing  whales,  the  few  people 
remaining  on  board  saw  an  immense  sperm  whale  come 


184 


CHASE  AND  CAPTURE,  ETC. 


up  close  to  the  ship,  and  when  very  near  he  appeared  to 
go  down  for  the  purpose  of  avoiding  the  vessel,  and  in 
doing  so  he  struck  his  body  against  some  part  of  the 
keel,  which  was  broken  off  by  the  force  of  the  blow  and 
floated  to  the  surface ; the  whale  was  then  observed  to 
rise  a short  distance  from  the  ship,  and  come  with  appa- 
rently great  fury  towards  it,  striking  against  one  of  the 
bows  with  his  head,  and  completely  “ staving”  it  in. 
The  ship  of  course  immediately  filled,  and  fell  over  on 
her  side,  in  which  dreadful  position  the  poor  fellows  in 
the  boats  soon  espied  their  only  home,  being  distant 
from  the  nearest  land  many  hundred  miles  ; on  return- 
ing to  the  wreck  thev  found  the  few  who  had  been  left 
on  board  hastily  congregated  in  a remaining  whale  boat, 
into  which  they  had  scarcely  time  to  take  refuge  before 
the  vessel  capsized.  They  with  much  difficulty  obtained 
a scanty  supply  of  provisions  from  the  wreck,  their  only 
support  on  the  long  and  dreary  passage  before  them 
to  the  coast  of  Peru,  to  which  thev  endeavoured  to 
make  the  best  of  their  way.  One  boat  was  fortunately 
found  by  a vessel  not  far  from  the  coast ; in  it  were  the 
only  survivors  of  the  unfortunate  crew,  three  in  number, 
the  remainder  having  perished  under  unheard-of  suffer- 
ing and  privation.  These  three  men  were  in  a state  of 
stupefaction,  allowing  their  boat  to  drift  about  where 
the  winds  and  waves  listed ; one  of  these  survivors  was 
the  master ; by  kind  and  careful  attention  on  the  part  of 
their  deliverers,  they  were  eventually  rescued  from  the 
jaws  of  death  to  relate  the  melancholy  tale. 


I 


185 


6 

CHAPTER  XIV. 


OF  THE  “ CUTTING  IN  ” AND  “ TRYING  OUT®3 


After  the  death  of  the  whale,  the  next  steps  are  to 
remove  the  fat  and  spermaceti,  and  to  extract  the  oil, 
the  reward  of  so  much  exertion  and  dangerous  enter- 
prise. This  process,  which  is  called  “ cutting  in,”  is 
divided  into  two  stages,  the  cutting  in  and  trying  out- 
in  these  operations  the  utmost  cleanliness  is  observed. 
As  soon  as  possible  after  the  whale  has  been  killed,  it  is 
brought  alongside  the  ship  to  be  cut  in,  by  means  of  in- 
struments which  are  called  “ spades.”  A man  descends 
upon  the  floating  carcass,  after  a hole  has  been  cut  near 
the  junction  of  the  body  with  the  head  by  a person 
stationed  on  a stage  by  the  side  of  the  ship,  into  which 
a large  blunt  hook  is  inserted  bv  the  man  who  descends 

O %/ 

upon  the  body  of  the  whale  for  that  purpose,  and  which  is 
called  “ hooking  on  a troublesome  and  even  dangerous 
operation  in  a turbulent  sea,  from  which  I have  often 
seen  men  drawn  up  by  the  rope  which  is  always  fixed 
around  them,  in  a completely  exhausted  state,  from 
having  been  frequently  submersed  by  the  waves  as  they 
have  rolled  over  the  body  of  the  whale  during  the  time 
they  have  been  endeavouring  to  “ hook  on.”  After  the 


188  OF  THE  a CUTTING  IN  ?? 

hook  is  inserted  it  is  drawn  upon  by  the  pullies  to 
which  it  is  attached,  and  a tension  being  exerted  upon 
the  fat,  or  blubber  as  it  is  termed,  it  is  then  cut  by  the 
spade  in  a strip  about  two  or  three  feet  broad,  in  a spiral 
direction  around  the  body  of  the  whale,  which  being 
drawn  up  by  means  of  the  windlass  acting  upon  pullies 
which  are  fixed  to  the  “ main-top/’  it  is  removed  much 
in  the  same  way  that  a spiral  roller  or  bandage  might 
be  ; of  course  as  the  “ blanket  pieces  ” ascend,  the  body 
of  the  whale  performs  a rotatory  motion,  until  the 
whole  is  stripped  off  to  the  tail  or  flukes.  The  head  is 
cut  off  in  the  beginning  of  the  process,  and  is  allowed 
to  float  astern  of  the  ship,  but  strongly  secured,  until 
the  body  has  undergone  its  flaying  process,  when  it  is 
hoisted  upon  end  by  the  pullies,  and  the  end  of  the  case 
being  opened,  the  fluid  spermaceti  is  drawn  from  it  by 
means  of  a bucket  and  pole,  which  is  used  to  force 
the  bucket  down  into  the  “case,”  so  as  to  become  filled 
with  its  valuable  contents.  The  “junk,”  which  forms, 
when  it  is  cut  from  .the  head,  a large  wedge-shaped 
mass  of  cellular  substance,  having  strong  ligamentous 
bands  intersecting  and  strengthening  its  structure,  is 
hoisted  on  board,  and  quickly  cut  up  into  square  oblong 
pieces,  while  the  head— after  the  case  has  been  emptied 
— is  let  go,  and  allowed  to  sink,  which  it  does  rapidly 
when  its  buoyant  property,  the  spermaceti,  is  removed. 
The  lean  and  shapeless  trunk,  after  the  fat  has  been 
taken  from  it,  is  allowed  to  float  away  just  before  the 
operations  on  the  head  commence. 

The  “ blanket  pieces  ” which  are  cut  from  the  long 


AND  TRYING  OUT.”  187 

strips  of  fat  or  blubber,  as  it  is  drawn  up,  with  the  junk 
and  spermaceti  from  the  case,  then  pass  through  different 
processes  in  the  “ trying  out  ;55  the  two  former,  being  cut 
up  into  thin  pieces  upon  blocks  called  “ horses,5'  are 
thrown  into  the  “ try-pots,55  into  which  the  oil  is  ex- 
tracted from  them  by  heat.  The  crisp  membranous 
parts  after  the  oil  is  extracted,  and  which  are  called  by 
whalers  “ scraps,55  serving  for  fuel ; while  the  sperma- 
ceti from  the  case  is  carefully  boiled  alone,  and  placed 
in  separate  casks,  when  it  is  called  “ head-matter.55 
These  operations  are  not  attended  with  any  unpleasant 
smell,  and  are  very  quickly  performed,  as  eighty  barrels 
of  oil  may  be  stowed  away  in  the  hold  of  the  ship  in 
less  than  three  days  after  the  destruction  of  the  animal. 


188 


CHAPTER  XVc 

OF  THE  FAVOURITE  PLACES  OF  RESORT  OF  THE 

SPERM  WHALE, 


Although  the  spermaceti  whale  has  been  seen,  and 
even  captured,  in  almost  every  part  of  the  ocean  between 
the  latitude  of  60°  south  and  60°  north,  I am  not  aware 
that  it  has  ever  been  seen  in  the  Mediterranean  sea, 
and  seldom,  or  never,  at  Greenland  by  modern  navi- 
gators  ; although  several  ancient  authors  agree  in  stating 
that  it  has  been  frequently  seen  there ; for  Cuvier  has 
stated  from  some  authority,  that  the  Greenlanders  are 
remarkably  fond  of  its  flesh,  which  they  consider  a 
delicate  viand,  when  it  is  dried  in  smoke ; they  “ also 
feed,35  says  Cuvier,  66  upon  the  fat,  entrails,  and  skin/ 
And  Sir  Thomas  Brown,  in  his  work  published  in  1686, 
after  stating  that  “ many  conceive  the  sperm  whale  to 
have  been  the  fish  which  swallowed  Jonas/5  also  says, 
that  “ Greenland  inquirers  seldom  meet  with  a whale 
of  this  kind/3 

Whether  this  has  been  the  case  in  former  times,  or 
not,  I will  not  presume  to  determine  ; I can  only  say, 
that  I have  now  made  many  inquiries  among  several 
captains  of  ships  who  have  been  engaged  in  the  Green- 
land  fisheries,  and  not  one  of  them  ever  saw  a sperm 


PLACES  OF  RESORT,  ETC. 


189 


whale  so  far  north  as  Greenland.  They  are  also  seldom 
or  never  seen  on  “ soundings/’  that  is  where  the  bottom 
of  the  sea  can  be  touched  by  the  deepest  sea-line,  or  in 
the  “ banks,”  as  they  are  termed  by  whalers,  that  exist 
in  various  parts  of  the  ocean,  as  the  6i  Brazil  banks,” 
which  are  only  discolorations  of  the  water  caused  by 
myriads  of  animalculse  which  perhaps  form  the  sus- 
tenance of  the  common  black  whale’s  food,  that  con- 
sists of  “ squillae  ” and  other  small  animals.  But  the 
sperm  whale  has  been  sometimes  taken  near  the  borders 
of  these  “ submarine  pastures,”  particularly  near  those 
of  Brazil.  The  favourite  places  of  his  resort  at  the 
present  day  appear  in  the  following  list : — - 

New  Guinea  and  parts  adjacent.— On  the  north 
coast  of  New  Guinea,  from  140°  to  146°,  east  longitude. 
New  Ireland,  from  Cape  St.  George  to  Cape  St.  Mary ; 
from  Squally  Island  to  the  northward;  from  St.  George’s 
Channel  to  the  southward ; on  the  east  coast  of  New 
Britain  ; about  the  islands  of  Bougainville  and  Bouka 
Bay,  particularly  off  the  northern  shore  of  Bougainville, 
as  far  as  the  Green,  or  Bentley’s  Islands ; Solomon’s 
Archipelago,  as  far  to  the  northward  as  Howe’s  Group  ; 
Malanta,  along  the  north-east  and  south-west  parts,  and 
in  the  straits,  as  far  to  the  north  as  Gower’s  Island;  and 
off  the  west  points  of  New  Hanover. 

King’s  Mill  Group . — Off  any  part  of  these  islands, 
but  more  particularly  off  the  south-west  parts  of  Roach’s 
Island,  distant  from  the  land  thirty  or  forty  miles ; and 
off  the  south-west  portion  of  Byron’s  Island. 


190 


PLACES  OF  RESORT 


Equinoctial  Line.— From  the  longitude  of  168°  to 
175°  east. 

Ellis’s  Group,— Off  the  south  side,  distant  from  the 
land  three  or  four  miles. 

Mitchell’s  Group,—  Off  the  south  side,  distant  from 
the  land  three  or  four  miles. 

Rotumah,— Off  the  south-east  side,  distant  from  the 
land  fifteen  to  thirty  miles. 

New  Holland,— Off  the  eastern  coast,  from  the  latitude 
of  25°  to  34°,  and  along  the  north-west  coast. 

New  Zealand, — From  the  east  cape  to  north  cape,  the 
land  dipping,  and  off  the  shore  to  the  north-eastward,  as 
far  as  Curtis’s  Island. 

Tong  atahoo,— Off  Middleburgh  Island  and  isles  adja- 
cent. 

Navigator  Islands,— South-west  side  of  Tootooillah. 

From  Fenning’s  to  Christmas  Island  — situated  on  the 
line, 

American  Continent.  Peru, — Off  the  shore,  from 
longitude  west  90°  to  130°,  in  the  latitude  5°  south  to 
the  line.  Coast  of  Peru,  from  the  line  to  16°  south,  off 
Paita  Head,  used  to  be  very  famous. 

Galapago’s  Islands, — Off  the  south  head  of  Albemarle 
Island,  Weather  and  Lee  Bays,  or  Elizabeth’s  and  Banks’ 
Bays. 

Middleground, — Between  the  continent  and  the  Gala- 
pago’s  Islands. 

Malacca  Islands, — Off  the  north  point  of  Moratay, 
and  off  the  east  and  west  sides  of  Gillalo,  and  also  off 
the  adjacent  isles* 


OF  THE  SPERM  WHALE. 


191 


Bouton . — Off  the  east  side,  and  in  the  straits. 

Timor.— In  the  straits  of  Timor;  off  the  south  side 
of  Omby ; off  the  south  side  of  Panton,  and  off  the 
south  side  of  the  adjacent  islands  as  far  as  Sandle-wood 
Island,  to  Java  Head;  and  off  the  shore  in  latitude  12° 
to  16°,  and  longitude  from  112°  to  120°. 

Mahee  Island.— Off  the  eastern  side ; off  Johanna 
Island,  in  the  Mozambique  Channel ; off  the  Island  of 
Aldahra ; on  the  line  from  55°  to  60° ; off  the  Cape 
St.  Mary’s,  Madagascar. 

Chili*— Off  the  island  of  Chiloe,  to  the  northward, 
along  the  coast  of  Chili,  and  as  far  south  as  37°,  the 
land  dipping. 

Calafornia.— Off  Cape  St.  Lucas,  and  off  the  Tres 
Maria  Islands. 

Japan.— Along  the  coast;  Volcano  Bay;  Loo  Choo 
Islands  ; off-shore  ground  of  Japan,  from  the  latitude  of 
28°  to  40°. 

Bonin  Islands. — All  round  them,  within  forty  miles. 

China  Sea. 

Red  Sea . 

Persian  Gulf. 

They  are  also  not  unfrequently  seen  about  the  equi- 
noctial line  in  the  Atlantic  Ocean. 


END  OF  PART  I. 


SKETCH  OF 


A SOUTH-SEA  WHALING  VOYAGE, 


PART  II. 


INTRODUCTORY  REMARKS. 

Having  given  all  the  information  in  my  power  upon 
the  various  subjects  embraced  by  the  preceding  portion 
of  this  work,  I could  not  consider  the  volume  complete 
if  left  without  an  account  of  the  various  parts  of  the 
world  to  which  whalers  resort  for  the  purpose  of  best 
carrying  their  designs  into  execution,  and  of  the  adven- 
tures and  accidents  which  oftentimes  befal  them  in  their 
arduous  exertions  to  obtain  a useful  termination  to  their 
voyage. 

If  any  apology  for  the  insertion  of  this  sketch  could 
be  thought  necessary,  I would  only  remind  the  reader 
of  the  many  thousands  who  are  directly  or  indirectly 
dependent  on  the  produce  of  the  spermaceti  whale 
fishery  for  their  support,  and  of  the  many  anxious 
persons  who  are  constantly  stretching  their  imaginations 
into  the  distant  regions  of  the  South  Seas  in  search  of 

K 


194 


INTRODUCTORY 


the  scenes  in  which  their  relatives  and  friends  may  be 
engaged,  and  who  so  often  search  in  vain  for  even 
a glimpse  of  information  on  the  subject : for  having 
no  written  accounts  to  refer  to,  at  the  best  they  could 
only  meet  with  some  person  who  may  have  himself 
visited  the  sperm  whale  fisheries,  but  who  might  not 
always  be  found  in  the  state  of  mind  or  leisure  best 
adapted  to  describe  all  that  might  be  required  by  the 
fond  mother  or  the  affectionate  friend. 

Besides,  I sincerely  hope  that  the  present  hasty 
sketch  of  the  scenes  of  these  labours  may  be  found  ser- 
viceable to  another  class  of  persons,  who  heretofore  have 
found  great  difficulty  in  obtaining  information  on  these 
matters,— I refer  to  those  who  may  be  about  embarking 
in  this  service ; so  that  they  may,  before  they  commence 
the  voyage,  make  themselves  acquainted  with  the  plea- 
sures and  also  with  the  dangers  to  which  they  may  be 
subjected  during  their  long  journeyings  in  so  many 
various  and  distant  parts  of  the  world. 

I must  beg  leave  also  to  remark  here,  that  all  may 
depend  upon  the  correctness  of  the  information  they 
may  find  scattered  throughout  the  following  sketch  of  a 
voyage  in  which  I was  personally  engaged,— for  although 
I may  be  an  enthusiastic  admirer  of  the  works  of  nature, 
and  may  sometimes  warmly  enter  into  descriptions  of 
her  beauties,  yet  I never  shall  be  found  straying  beyond 
the  boundary  of  truth. 

That  something  of  the  kind  which  I have  perhaps 
now  presumed  to  present  was  required,  may,  I think,  be 
justly  inferred  from  the  fact,  that  the  generality  of  people 


REMARKS. 


195 


are  not  even  aware  that  a South  Sea  voyage  embraces  so 
large  an  extent  of  the  world  as  it  really  does,  nor  do 
they  suppose  that  the  southern  whaler  so  often  explores 
parts  of  the  creation  which  Europeans  have  never  before 
seen those  portions  of  the  globe  which  have  been  so 
seldom  visited  even  by  the  most  renowned  travellers, 
are  to  the  sperm  whaler  thrown  entirely  open.  In 
search  of  his  prey  he  leaves  no  sea  untroubled ; those 
dangers  which  deter  the  merchantmen  from  approaching 
the  unexplored  shores  which  abound  in  the  North  and 
South  Pacific  oceans,  are  to  him  6i  trifles  light  as  air.’* 
Even  the  intrepid  character  of  our  navy  cannot  be  com- 
pared with  that  of  the  whaler,  who,  bred  from  his  boy- 
hood in  this  arduous  service,  knows  no  fear  among  the 
dangerous  coral  shoals  and  sunken  rocks  with  which  the 
seas  he  so  often  traverses  abound,  and  views  without, 
dismay  the  billows  breaking  on  the  shores  of  lands 
unknown,  and  but  too  often  inhabited  by  the  barbarous 
savage. 

We  trace  him  as  the  apprentice,  the  boatsteerer,  and 
through  the  gradations  of  mates,  before  we  see  him 
entitled  to  the  enviable  berth  of  captain ; and  then  we 
perceive  him  of  the  middle  age,  weather-worn,  and 
thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  knowledge  requisite  to 
take  command  of  the  ship  which  may  be  entrusted  to 
his  care.  Ever  watchful  and  wary  when  near  land,  his 
repose  is  of  short  duration  ; at  any  sudden  sound  or  un- 
usual occurrence  he  is  instantly  on  deck,  in  the  middle 
of  the  dark  tempestuous  night,  and  he  sleeps  not  until 
his  charge — the  ship —is  free  from  every  danger.  Amid 


196 


INTRODUCTORY 


tempests  and  unexplored  regions,  even  at  the  antipodes, 
he  guides  his  bark  with  safety  and  triumph ; all  dangers 
he  defies,  confident  of  his  skill  in  seamanship,  and 
avoiding  them  by  his  watchfulness  and  care  ;—to-day 
Cape  Horn  with  its  rugged  front  rises  to  his  view,  anon 
the  burning  zone  reminds  him  of  his  course ; in  his 
passage  the  most  remote  lands  are  laid  open  for  his 
observation, “the  most  rugged  and  barbarous,  the  most 
beautiful  and  friendly,  are  in  turn  presented  to  him,  and 
seem  to  provoke  his  admiration  or  dislike.  At  times  he 
is  amused  by  the  capture  of  the  agile  albacore,  the 
hungry  shark,  or  impetuous  dolphin  ; anon  the  Indian 
typhoon,  with  its  dreadful  power,  severely  proves  the 
strength  of  his  wandering  habitation ; and  then  he  is 
seen,  proudly  stemming  with  a flowing  sheet  the  smooth 
and  beautiful  ocean,  with  only  the  sea-bird  for  his  com- 
panion or  the  sportive  dolphin  for  his  follower. 

At  other  times,  during  his  long  absence,  his  zeal  is 
redoubled  for  the  success  of  the  voyage  by  a growing 
desire  to  return  to  his  native  land,  and  his  bosom  heaves 
with  anguish  when  he  suddenly  thinks  of  the  vast  dis- 
tance which  separates  him  from  his  beloved  wife,  his 
children,  his  parent,  or  his  friend  ; but  his  reflections 
may  be  suddenly  interrupted— as  the  next  moment,  with 
his  feeble  arm  he  is  engaged  in  deadly  strife  with  the 
monarch  of  the  sea : one  moment  he  conquers,  the  next 
he  has  nearly  fallen  a sacrifice  to  the  convulsions  of  his 
dying  victim,  whose  blood  pouring  in  fountains  from  his 
mortal  wounds  or  panting  nostril,  incarnadines  the  deep 
with  purple  stain.  He  returns  to  the  ship  a conqueror ; 


REMARKS. 


197 


the  slain  monster  lies  floating  on  the  vast  bosom  of  the 
ocean,  and  rewards  him  for  the  dangers  he  has  under- 
gone in  its  capture  by  the  greatness  of  its  value.  In 
short,  if  we  survey,  even  with  a hasty  glance,  the  strange 
vicissitudes  of  a South  Sea  voyage,  we  shall  perfectly 
coincide  with  those  who  believe  that  “ truth  is  stranger 
than  fiction.” 


198 


CHAPTER  L 


We  left  England  on  the  16th  of  October  1830  ; but  I 
shall  not  tire  the  reader  with  the  description  of  anything 
which  I saw  before  our  arrival  in  the  South  Pacific 
Ocean,  because  the  same  has  been  done  so  often  by  other 
travellers  that  I have  thought  it  quite  necessary  to  omit 
any  description  in  this  sketch,  although  I saw  multi- 
tudes of  objects  which  divided  my  attention ; and  as  I 
had  never  attempted  the  ways  of  the  pathless  deep 
before,  they  found  me  in  abundant  food  for  reflection 
and  admiration. 

We  saw  no  land,  after  we  had  left  our  own  white  cliffs, 
until  off  Cape  Horn,  of  which  it  was  our  good  fortune 
to  have  a full  and  ample  view.  As  a place  renowned 
among  travellers,  Cape  Horn  has  always  stood  foremost 
in  their  tales  of  wonder ; from  Lord  Anson’s  to  our  own 
times,  it  has  remained  the  scene  of  many  a mariner’s 
tale.  Whether  we  regard  the  dangerous  Straits  of 
Magellan-— the  “Terra  del  Fuego,”  or  land  of  fire  of 
the  Spaniards— the  giant  Patagonians  themselves,  who 
reside  in  its  vicinity — the  beautiful  and  interesting  con- 
stellations of  the  Magellan  clouds,  or  that  of  “ la  Crus,” 
which  are  to  be  seen  in  its  locality— or  Wager  Island, 
which  is  not  far  distant;  the  scene  of  the  wreck  of  the 
“ Wager”  man-of-war,  in  which  our  poet’s  “ grand-dad  ” 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


199 


(Commodore  Byron)  figured.  If  we  regard  it  with 
wonder  for  these  associations,  or  for  the  awful  sublimity 
of  its  own  aspect— its  extreme  barrenness,  ruggedness, 
and  stormy  locality— for  one  of  these  things,  or  alto- 
gether,  it  must  always  continue  to  be  a place  of  great 
interest  to  the  traveller ; and  its  being  the  southernmost 
point  of  the  great  American  continent,  stretching  into 
the  constantly  troubled  ocean,  and  dividing  the  mighty 
Pacific  and  Atlantic,  entitle  it  to  the  consideration  of 
the  wanderer. 

We  passed  its  southernmost  point  on  the  5th  of 
January  1831,  within  a musket  shot  of  the  shore.  I 
can  only  say  that  it  is  a mass  of  as  rugged  and  inhospi- 
table looking  land  as  any  person  could  wish  to  see, 
although  we  passed  it  in  its  mid-summer.  It  appeared 
most  cheerless  and  melancholy.  By  what  means  the 
poor  human  inhabitants  of  this  dreary  place  survive  the 
long  and  intense  winters,  I am  at  a loss  to  know  ; for  its 
very  midsummer  appeared  to  us  an  English  winter  of 
the  worst  kind. 

The  population  appears  to  consist  but  of  a few,  and 
these  are  probably  rapidly  on  the  wane  ; for  Weddle,  in 
his  account  of  these  regions,  represents  them  as  a wretched 
race  of  beings,  who  are  miserably  clad,  and  subsist  prin- 
cipally upon  shell-fish,  which  they  gather  from  the  rocks 
which  bound  the  tempestuous  ocean ; he  calls  them  the 
Terra  del  Fuegians,  because  they  inhabit  the  land  of 
that  name,  which  forms  Cape  Horn  itself,  and  is  sepa- 
rated from  the  great  continent  by  the  Straits  of  Magellan. 

Weddle  observes  that,  although  they  appear  so  much 


200 


SOUTH  SEA 


in  want  of  the  common  necessaries  of  life,  they  seem 
to  possess  spirits  of  considerable  buoyancy,  as  the  few 
which  he  had  the  good  fortune  to  meet  with  (for  they  are 
hut  rarely  seen)  in  one  of  his  excursions  along  the  coast 
evinced  much  sensible  and  lively  good-nature ; he  also 
states  that,  although  their  language,  as  we  naturally  an- 
ticipate, is  totally  different  to  our  own,  still  they  possess  a 
remarkable  capability  of  imitating  our  sounds,  of  which 
he  gives  a ludicrous  example;  for,  he  continues,  “like  most 
other  persons  in  their  condition,  they  are  not  very  honest ; 
and  one  of  them,  having  taken  a fancy  to  a culinary 
vessel  belonging  to  one  of  the  sailors,  endeavoured  to 
secrete  it,  but  not  without  being  observed  by  the  seaman, 
who  soon  demanded  it  in  a very  peremptory  manner,  by 
ejaculating,  cyou  copper-coloured  rascal,  give  me  back 
my  tin  pot/  The  Fuegian  smiled  in  the  sailor’s  face, 
and  imitated  his  words  so  accurately  that  every  one  pre- 
sent was  astonished,  and  at  first  thought  him  well  ac- 
quainted with  our  language ; but  they  had  many  indu- 
bitable proofs  that  these  were  the  first  Europeans  they 
had  ever  met  with.”  With  all  their  wants,  not  knowing 
that  which  is  really  within  their  intellectual  or  physical 
reach,  those  Fuegians,  in  their  wretched  condition,  when 
compared  with  our  own,  seem  to  possess  a consi- 
derable share  of  that  inestimable  blessing— happiness : 
although  the  dark  damp  atmosphere  robs  them  of  genial 
light  and  warmth— although  the  howling  tempest  rages 
over  their  uncovered  heads  with  awful  violence,  and  the 
rolling  billows  of  the  Western  main  shake  their  native 
land  to  its  foundation,  wdiile  the  iron  hand  of  winter  re- 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


201 


fuses  the  earth’s  accustomed  bounty  ; still  in  these  dreary 
regions  man  finds  considerable  happiness,  for  “ God 
tempereth  the  wind  to  the  shorn  lamb  and  these  poor 
Fuegians  may  be  as  happy  with  their  scanty  meal  as  the 
greatest  emperor  over  his  coronation  feast. 

We  saw  the  small  islands  which  are  called  the  Ilde- 
fonzas,  and  which  are  situated  in  a south-west  direction 
from  Cape  Horn,  and  at  a small  distance  from  it.  These 
rocky  isles  offer  nothing  worthy  of  remark,  except  that 
at  the  time  I saw  them  they  were  surrounded  with 
thousands  of  sea-fowl  of  various  kinds,  which  were 
amusing  themselves  in  the  air  above  and  around  their 
shores. 

We  now  ran  with  a fair  wind,  along  the  coast  of 
Patagonia,  which  is  rocky,  uneven  and  barren.  Although 
we  had  a good  view  of  the  coast,  we  had  not  the  good 
fortune  to  see  any  of  the  inhabitants  thereof,  the  cele- 
brated Patagonians ; but  I was  so  fortunate  as  to  meet 
with  Captain  Minors,  whose  ship  we  fell  in  with  off 
these  parts,  and  who  had  on  a former  voyage  actually 
traded  with  those  Brobdignagians,»—but  then  he  had 
passed  through  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  and  had  met 
with  them  there,  on  its  shores.  He  did  not  go  so  far  as 
Gonzalo  Fernandez  Oviedo,  a Spanish  writer,  who  was 
imposed  upon  by  the  clergyman  Arizega,  in  stating  that 
the  Patagonians  were  so  gigantic  a race  that  a tall  man 
could  not  reach  the  girdle  of  one  of  them,  or  that  they 
were  in  the  habit  of  consuming  a couple  of  pounds  of 
raw  flesh  at  a mouthful,  or  that  they  swallowed  eighteen 
or  twenty  gallons  of  water  at  a draught.  Nor  did  his 

k 2 


SOUTH  SEA 


account  agree  with  that  of  the  Dutch  writer  Sebaldus 
Veert,  who,  among  other  extraordinary  accounts  of  the 
same  people,  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  they  were  of  a 
height  to  fill  men  with  horror,  and  that  such  was  their 
enormous  strength,  that  they  could  pluck  up  whole 
trees  by  the  roots  ! Nor  did  he  agree  with  our  own 
countryman  Cavendish,  who  stated  that  their  feet  were 
eighteen  inches  long ; nor  with  Mr.  C.  Clark,  an  officer 
in  Commodore  Byron’s  ship,  who  in  a letter,  published 
in  the  “Philosophical  Transactions,”  vol.  lvii«,  described 
them  as  men  of  nine  feet  in  height,  and  even  exceeding 
this  stature.  But  Captain  Minors,  of  the  Honourable 
Hudson’s  Bay  Company,  agreed  with  Captain  Wallis, 
who  also  visited  the  Patagonians  in  1766,  and  measured 
these  people;  and  he  too  coincided  with  the  accounts 
given  of  them  by  Captain  Carteret,  M.  Bougainville, 
and  also  with  Don  Ibagnez  Barnardo  de  Echavarri ; in 
stating  that  they  were  very  frequently  seen  of  seven 
feet  in  height,  and  many  of  those  with  whom  he  traded 
for  trifling  articles,  were  within  an  inch  or  so  of  seven 
feet,  and  they  were  commonly  seen  of  six  feet  six  and 
seven  inches.  He  described  them  to  me  as  a very  kind 
and  peaceable  set  of  beings,  who  traded  with  him  for 
some  of  their  articles  of  dress  or  ornament  vrith  the 
greatest  good-will  and  confidence. 

Commodore  Byron,  who  entered  the  Straits  of  Ma- 
gellan in  1764,  represented  them  as  a gigantic  race.  He 
states  that  one  of  them,  who  appeared  to  be  a chief, 
had  the  skin  of  a wild  beast  thrown  over  his  shoulders, 
and  was  painted  so  as  to  exhibit  a hideous  appearance ; 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


203 


round  one  e was  a circle  of  black,  a circle  of  white 
surrounded  the  other,  and  the  rest  of  the  “ human  face 
divine 57  was  streaked  with  paint  of  various  colours ; 
they  were  all  painted  and  clothed  in  nearly  the  same 
manner,  their  teeth  were  as  white  as  ivory,  remarkably 
even  and  well  set ; but,  except  the  skin  which  they 
wore,  with  the  hair  inwards,  most  of  them  were  naked, 
some  few  only  having  on  their  feet  a kind  of  boot,  with 
a sharp  pointed  stick  fastened  to  each  heel,  which 
served  as  a spur.  When  they  were  prevailed  upon  to 
sit  down,  they  accepted  with  pleasure,  a quantity  of 
yellow  and  white  beads,  which  were  distributed  among 
them  ; they  did  not  appear  to  be  wholly  strangers  to 
European  ornaments,  for  one  woman  among  them,  of 
enormous  size,  and  having  her  face  frightfully  painted, 
had  bracelets  either  of  brass  or  very  pale  gold  upon  her 
arms,  and  some  beads  of  blue  glass  strung  upon  two 
plaits  of  her  hair, — they  had  a great  number  of  dogs 
with  them,  with  which  it  was  supposed  they  chased 
wild  animals  for  their  food;  they  also  had  horses  with 
them,  which  they  managed  with  great  dexterity ; the 
women  rode  astride,  and  both  men  and  women  without 
stirrups,  and  yet  they  galloped  without  fear  over  the 
sprit  on  the  shore,  the  stones  of  which  were  large,  loose 
and  slippery they  are  of  a copper  colour,  with  long 
black  hair. 

Leaving  this  land  of  giants  and  marvellous  tales, 
which  has  served  as  a prolific  quarry  to  the  romancer, 
we  wended  our  way  along  the  coast  of  Chili.  I could 
almost  digress  again  when  I think  of  the  town  of  Con- 


204 


SOUTH  SEA 


ception  which  we  passed,  the  scene  of  the  dreadful 
earthquake  that  occurred  in  1751,  in  which  the  town 
was  swallowed  up  by  the  sea.  The  fruit  trees  at  this 
place  are  obliged  to  be  thinned  of  their  produce,  lest  the 
overloaded  state  of  the  branches  should  weigh  them 
to  the  ground.  We  touched  at  Valparaiso,  as  we  sailed 
along  the  coast ; but  I shall  not  detain  the  reader  with 
remarks  upon  that  place,  except  that  I was  much  dis- 
appointed with  its  appearance ; the  houses  are  meanly 
built,  and  placed  in  a very  irregular  manner.  I was 
much  surprised  at  the  great  number  of  dogs  which  I 
saw  here,  and  also  at  the  great  number  of  idle  persons 
which  were  lounging  about  it,  but  who,  nevertheless, 
appeared  to  amuse  themselves  by  devouring  delicious 
water  melons  in  considerable  quantities,  the  shells  or 
rinds  of  which  were  scattered  all  over  the  place.  We 
obtained  a small  quantity  of  fruit  here,  consisting  of  the 
anana  or  pine-apple,  with  some  water  melons  of  extreme 
delicacy  of  flavour ; we  also  purchased  some  grapes  in 
the  fruit  market  which  is  here  established,— but  we 
were  rather  too  earlv  in  the  season  to  obtain  them  at  a 
cheap  rate. 

We  soon  continued  our  progress  for  Coquimbo,  a 
town  which  stands  upon  the  borders  of  a very  beautiful 
bay,  and  which  is  situated  at  about  three  degrees  distant 
from  Valparaiso.  When  we  arrived,  and  had  entered 
the  bay,  we  let  go  our  anchor  for  the  first  time  since 
leaving  our  own  native  land,  for  the  purpose  of  refitting 
the  ship  and  refreshing  the  crew,  for  which  we  remained 
about  fourteen  days,  during  which  I managed  to  pass  my 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


205 


time  very  agreeably,  either  in  collecting  shells  from  along 
the  sea  shore,  of  which  a few  may  be  gathered,— in 
visiting  the  town,  and  mixing  with  its  inhabitants, — 
watching  the  flight  of  the  great  condor,  which  sometimes 
measures  thirty  feet  from  the  tip  of  each  wing,— or  in 

V. 

examining  the  curious  beach  which  surrounds  the  bay, 
parts  of  which  are  formed  of  vast  masses  of  agglutinated 
shells,  even  reaching  in  some  places  to  thirty  or  forty 
feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  rendering  it  an  interesting 
spot  for  the  resort  of  the  geologist. 

It  was  at  this  place,  too,  that  I first  felt  the  shock  of 
an  earthquake,  which  indeed  is  terrible  enough.  It  is 
said,  at  Peru,  that  the  oftener  the  natives  of  the  place 
feel  those  vibrations  of  the  earth,  instead  of  becoming 
habituated  to  them,  as  persons  do  who  are  constantly  ex- 
posed to  other  dangers,  they  become  more  filled  with 
dismay  every  time  the  shock  is  repeated,  so  that  aged 
people  often  find  the  terror  a slight  shock  will  produce 
almost  insupportable.  I had  been  to  the  town  of 
Coquimbo,  and  had  returned  to  the  port  about  ten  in 
the  evening,  and,  when  I arrived  at  the  edge  of  the  bay, 
I was  alarmed,  and  indeed  all  who  happened  to  be 
present,  at  the  sudden  alteration  of  the  appearance  of 
the  water  in  the  harbour;  there  was  a “ dead  calm,”  as 
sailors  say, — not  a breath  of  wind  stirring;  but  it  was  a 
most  delightful  night,  “ holy  in  silence,  and  in  splendour 
bright,”  when  suddenly  the  water  became  much  agitated, 
and  being  full  of  phosphorent  animalculse,  the  bay  resem- 
bled a vast  cauldron  of  molten  lead;  and  while  we  all 
stood  in  amazement,  watching  the  fiery  agitated  wraters, 


206 


SOUTH  SEA 


we  felt  a motion  of  the  ground  that  I shall  never  be  able 
accurately  to  describe.  It  appeared  to  me,  from  the  sen- 
sation I received,  as  if  the  earth  was  suddenly  crushed 
by  its  own  weight.  It  resembled  very  nearly  the  sensa- 
tion a person  experiences  when  he  takes  a mass  of  snow 
in  his  hands,  and  endeavours  to  compress  it ; it  is  that 
feeling,  as  if  the  snow  was  suddenly  crushed  within 
itself,  that  I am  endeavouring  to  describe, — a crushing 
of  the  fibres,— a sudden  contraction  of  the  atoms,  which 
every  person  must  be  familiar  with.  Such  were  my 
ideas  the  moment  after  I had  experienced  the  shock. 

The  water  was  so  exceedingly  luminous  that,  while 
we  were  rowing  on  board,  it  appeared,  as  it  dripped  from 
the  oars  which  the  men  were  plying,  exactly  like  red- 
hot  fluid  metal.  When  I went  on  shore  the  following 
morning,  I found  that  the  inhabitants  considered  the 
earthquake  of  the  preceding  evening  rather  a violent 
one,  it  being  sufficiently  so  as  to  cause  a considerable 
rent  in  the  wall  of  a Mr.  Richardson’s  house,  an  Eng- 
lishman, who  has  resided  here  for  some  time,  and  who 
stated  to  me  that  shocks  of  the  kind  I have  mentioned 
were  far  from  uncommon. 

From  a few  English  gentlemen  who  had  taken  up 
their  abode  at  this  place,  from  motives  of  business,  I 
received  many  tokens  of  British  hospitality.  A hundred 
and  fifty  degrees  of  longitude  may  separate  a man  from 
his  native  country,  but  the  distance  does  not  wean  him 
from  the  feelings  of  his  youth,  which  he  has  imbibed  in 
the  land  of  his  birth  ; the  scorching  rays  of  a tropical 
sun  may  blaze  around  him,  and  change  the  colour  of 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


207 


his  complexion,— the  frozen  regions  of  the  southern  or 
northern  pole  may  retard  the  rapid  current  of  his  blood, 
but  they  can  neither  change  nor  retard  the  warm  and 
generous  feelings  of  an  Englishman,  wherever  he  may 
happen  to  reside. 

One  day,  on  going  up  to  the  town  of  C o qui m b o , — th  e 
best  way  to  get  to  it  from  the  port,  as  it  is  called,  is 
on  the  back  of  a mule,— I found  the  inhabitants  merry- 
making, and  celebrating  the  feast  of  the  “Cheya;”  in 
this  commemoration  they  have  a very  remarkable  usage 
of  throwing  water  at  each  other,  or  at  any  person  they 
may  meet  or  see  in  the  street ; the  poorer  persons  carry 
it  about  in  bladders,  which  have  a small  hole  made  in 
some  part  of  them,  which  allows  the  fluid  to  escape  at 
the  will  of  the  projector.  By  merely  employing  a little 
pressure  upon  it,  a long  stream  of  water  rushes  out,  and 
bespatters  the  face  of  any  luckless  perambulator  who 
does  not  quickly  take  to  his  heels  or  otherwise  escape 
the  ablution  ; but  those  who  are  higher  in  the  scale  of 
Croesus  employ  other  means  of  enjoying  their  recreation. 
The  ladies,  for  instance,  amuse  themselves  by  sprinkling 
rose  or  other  scented  waters  upon  the  pedestrian  from  a 
balcony  or  window,  and  great  is  their  delight  when  they 
succeed  in  surprising  the  unwary  traveller  with  their 
odoriferous  shower-baths.  Such  was  my  fate  one  fine 
evening,  just  before  sunset:  as  I was  passing  through  a 
quiet  and  lonely  street,  I was  attracted  to  a certain  spot, 
on  perceiving  a few  very  beautiful  flowers  lying  scattered 
on  the  pavement,  which  happened  to  be  directly  under  a 
balcony,  and  which  had  no  doubt  been  purposely  placed 


208 


SOUTH  SEA 


there  by  the  hands  of  some  fair  freebooter  ; for,  no  sooner 
had  I secured  the  floral  prizes,  than  I found  myself  freely 
sprinkled  with  the  rosy  perfume.  I looked  up  imme- 
diately, but  the  being  or  beings  had  vanished  who  had 
emptied  the  phial  of  their  gaiety  upon  me,  but  I heard 
sundry  6C  still  small  voices  55  enjoying  the  delightful  mis- 
chief with  amazing  satisfaction. 

The  following  incident  I hope  may  serve  to  show  how 
cautious  it  is  necessary  for  every  person  to  be  who  is  in 
the  habit  of  visiting  strange  countries,  so  that  they  may 
not  rely  with  a blind  confidence  at  any  time  upon  persons 
of  whose  manners  and  circumstances  they  may  know  but 
little. 

Having  been  induced  to  accompany  a Captain  Chase 
to  the  town  one  day,  on  the  promise  that  he  would  return 
with  me  to  the  port  the  same  evening,  we  spent  the  day 
agreeably;  but,  when  the  evening  arrived,  I received  a 
note  from  the  captain,  stating  that  it  would  be  impos- 
sible for  him  to  return  to  the  port  until  the  following 
morning,  as  business  of  a peculiar  nature  had  interrupted 
his  determination.  I,  therefore,  who  had  determined  to 
return  at  the  time  I intended  in  the  morning  when  I set 
out,  took  measures  accordingly,  even  against  the  advice 
of  several  English  residents  of  the  place ; for  I had 
urgent  business  at  the  ship,  and  I felt  myself  compelled 
to  go ; but  it  was  near  sunset  before  I mounted  my  mule 
for  the  purpose.  I had  not  gone  far  before  the  dark- 
ness became  intense,  and  I in  some  way  or  other  unfor- 
tunately mistook  my  road,  and  after  wandering  to  and 
fro  for  upwards  of  two  hours,  I found  myself  involved  in 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


209 


such  a Cretan  labyrinth,  that  I could  neither  find  my 
way  to  the  place  of  my  destination  nor  to  that  which  I 
had  left,  and  which  to  have  unravelled  in  such  a night 
would  have  required  the  clue  of  Ariadne,  with  all  the 
love  she  bore  to  Theseus.  I had  made  some  inquiries 
at  the  outskirts  of  the  town,  having  entered  several 
houses  for  that  purpose ; but  now  I was  surrounded 
with  trees  and  fields,  and  I had  not  seen  a house  for 
upwards  of  an  hour,  but  hearing  at  last  the  sound  of 
a guitar  and  of  several  voices  indulging  in  shouts  of 
mirth,  I directed  my  mule  to  the  spot;  and  when  I 
arrived  I perceived  a number  of  people  engaged  in  the 
court-yard  of  a house,  merry-making ; some  were  dan- 
cing, others  were  singing,  while  a few  thrummed  upon 
the  iC  light  guitar.55  I soon  entered  the  festive  throng, 
and  endeavoured  to  make  myself  understood  in  inquiring 
my  way  to  the  port  of  Coquimbo,  but  they  either  could 
not  or  would  not  understand  my  questions,  which  cer- 
tainly were  put  in  wretchedly  bad  Spanish,  and  at  last, 
after  many  fruitless  attempts  to  procure  the  information 
I required,  they  induced  me  to  sit  on  a wooden  bench  at 
the  root  of  a wide-spreading  fruit  tree,  to  observe  their 
rejoicings.  I shall  never  forget  the  tune  they  thrummed 
upon  the  guitars,  or  the  agile  and  graceful  movements  of 
the  dancers,  or  the  merry  volubility  of  their  songs,  nor 
shall  I ever  cease  to  remember  the  condescension  of  the 
ladies  who  formed  a part  of  the  assembly.  After  they 
had  finished  one  of  their  dances,  one  of  the  young 
women  came  from  the  group,  and  offered  me  a small 
quantity  of  a liqueur  wdiich  she  called  in  Spanish  “ aqua- 


210 


SOUTH  SEA 


dente  I accepted  a little,— I accepted  it  from  the  hands 
of  smiling  beauty  as  the  proffered  cup  of  friendship  and 
hospitality,— as  the  cup  of  welcome  to  the  lost  stranger  ; 
but  it  was  a draught  drugged  with  some  powerful 
narcotic,  which  soon  darkened  my  mind ; — it  was  the 
draught  taken  from  Lethe’s  spring,  which  soon  worked 
its  unhallowed  spell,  for  I must  have  fallen  asleep  almost 
immediately,  as  I recollect  nothing  which  occurred  after- 
wards, until  I awoke  the  following  morning  at  daybreak, 
after  lying  exposed  to  the  open  air  all  night,  bitten,  too, 
all  over  by  the  fleas,  which  inhabit  the  sands  of  this 
place  in  countless  myriads ; and,  in  rising  from  the 
ground,  dreary  and  benumbed  as  I was,  the  first  thing 
which  struck  me  with  surprise  was  my  purse,  which  had 
been  well  filled,  lying  on  the  ground  in  an  empty  state, 
I instinctively  looked  for  the  spurs  a friend  had  lent 
me  to  expedite  my  journey,  and  which  were  of  chased 
massive  silver,  exceedingly  valuable,  being  worked  in 
the  costly  old  Spanish  style  ; much  to  my  delight  I 
found  that  booty  had  escaped  the  robbers,  I then 
immediately  went  to  the  door  of  the  house  which  was 
near  me,  and  with  which  I did  not  deal  very  gently ; 
and,  although  I thundered  at  it  with  unceasing  applica- 
tion, it  was  several  minutes  before  any  one  attended  to 
my  calls  ; it  then  was  opened  by  two  very  old  women, 
who,  after  hearing  my  complaints  and  being  shown  my 
empty  purse,  shook  their  hypocritical  heads,  and  uttered 
with  great  sanctity,  “ Mucho  malo  picaroon.”  Finding 
my  mule  had  been  secured  to  a post,  I thought  it  would 
be  the  best  way  to  mount  him,  and  proceed  on  my 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


211 


journey  to  the  port,  seeing  no  other  persons  about,  and 
knowing  that  I was  not  likely  to  obtain  redress  without 
great  trouble  and  expense ; therefore,  after  having  abused 
the  old  women  in  English,  which  they  did  not  under- 
stand,  I sallied  forth  on  my  journey,  finding  my  way 
easily  enough,  it  being  light.  When  I arrived  at  the 
port  I recounted  my  night's  adventure  to  the  persons  I 
found  there,  which  excited  the  commiseration  of  some, 
the  laughter  of  others,  and  the  blame  of  many. 

After  having  remained  at  this  place  for  about  fourteen 
days,  we,  on  the  16th  of  February  1831,  weighed  anchor, 
and  spread  our  sails  to  catch  the  gentle  winds  which 
constantly  blow  here,  to  waft  us  from  Coquimbo  and 
from  our  newly-made  friends,  all  of  whom  had  behaved 
so  kindly  that  we  felt  on  our  departure  as  if  we  were 
leaving  a second  home.  But  we  were  soon  outside  the 
land,  and  on  the  great  and  beautiful  Pacific  Ocean,  where 
our  newly-made  woes  were  soon  scattered  to  the  winds 
amidst  the  variety  of  interesting  scenes  with  which 
we  now  became  surrounded.  At  day-break  the  vast 
Cordilleras  were  in  sight,  appearing  to  reach  to  “high 
heaven  — below,  the  irregular  and  desert  shore  hemmed 
in  the  great  ocean,  which  now  swarmed  with  living  crea- 
tures. The  humpbacked  whale  sported  in  the  smooth 
water,  his  polished  skin  glistening  in  the  rays  of  the 
scorching  sun ; seals  also,  at  a small  distance  from  the 
shore,  were  lying  as  if  asleep  upon  the  surface,  basking 
in  the  heat.  Hundreds  of  large  albacore  and  bonito 
now  crowded  about  our  vessel,  and  gave  employment  to 
those  who  could  be  spared  from  the  duties  of  the  ship,  in 


212 


SOUTH  SEA 


catching  them  with  the  hook.  The  ugly  sun-fish  now 
and  then  came  floating  by,  and  gave  the  young  har- 
pooneer  a chance  of  shewing  his  newly-acquired  dex- 
terity, by  plunging  the  barbed  iron  into  their  grisly 
bodies.  The  ferocious  sword-fish  frequently  shewed 
himself,  much  to  the  terror  of  the  bonito  and  albacore, 
which  shot  through  the  fluid  element  with  wonderful 
velocity,  to  escape  from  their  voracious  pursuers.  The 
varieties  of  polypi  and  medusae  which  abound  here  are 
immense,  and  would  find  the  naturalist  with  employ- 
ment for  a century,  were  he  to  particularise  the  whole  of 
their  curious  peculiarities. 

While  on  the  shore,  the  tall  flamingo,  the  dingy  shag, 
the  golden -breasted  penguin,  the  large  grey  pelican,  the 
scissors-bill  and  diver,  gave  us  sufficient  objects  for 
reflecting  on  the  wisdom  and  greatness  of  Him  who  had 
formed  them,  and  had  placed  them  there,  to  enliven  the 
barren  and  inanimate  rocks  with  their  presence— to 
inhabit  the  dreary  solitude — -to  animate  the  wilderness. 
At  night- fall  lines  of  pelicans,  returning  from  their  day’s 
fishing,  could  be  seen  flying  towards  the  land,  and  in 
the  morning  at  sun-rise  they  could  be  seen  leaving  it  for 
the  sea  in  the  same  order,  going  out  to  their  daily  labour. 
I have  seen  some  of  those  lines,  which  are  formed  by 
each  bird  flying  immediately  after  the  other,  for  half  a 
mile  in  length,  and  I have  seen  four  or  five  such  lines 
at  the  same  moment.  Now  and  then  the  great  condor 
might  be  observed  at  an  immense  distance,  floating  in 
ethereal  space,  and  with  its  powerful  and  wonderful  eye 
scanning  the  surface  of  the  vast  plains  or  uneven  beach 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


213 


for  some  object  of  attack.  So  that  wheresoever  our 
observance  fell  we  could  enjoy  rare  and  beautiful  scenes, 
and  as  we  still  continued  to  steer  pretty  close  to  the 
shore,  we  had  an  opportunity  of  witnessing  a greater 
variety  of  views  than  if  we  had  been  farther  out  at  sea. 

Five  or  six  days  after  we  had  left  Coquimbo,  and  not 
being  more  than  forty  or  fifty  miles  from  the  main  land 
of  Peru,  at  about  six  a.m.,  sailing  with  a pleasant 
breeze,  we  found  ourselves  close  abreast  of  a mass 
of  rugged-looking  rocks,  which  rise  suddenly  out  of 
the  sea;  they  are  near  the  small  island  which  is 
called  “ Isla  de  la  Plata”  by  the  Spaniards;  and  we 
soon  discovered  from  the  roaring  noise  we  heard,  that 
great  numbers  of  the  common  hair  seals  were  upon  them, 
the  male  of  which  is  as  large  as  an  African  lion,  with 
much  of  the  same  form  of  head,  mane,  and  body  as  that 
noble  animal  possesses  ; only  having  in  the  place  of  legs 
a kind  of  fins,  with  which  they  swim  with  great  power 
and  velocity.  Their  roaring,  joined  with  a kind  of 
yelping  or  barking  from  a great  number  of  cubs  which 
attended  their  dams,  was  heard  far  above  the  roaring  of 
the  surf,  which  in  itself  was  remarkably  loud.  We  soon 
got  very  near  to  them ; and  our  captain  immediately 
determined  to  send  off  three  boats  with  their  full  comple- 
ment of  crews,  for  the  purpose  of  killing  as  many  of 
them  as  possible  for  the  sake  of  their  skins,  which  were 
known  to  be  exceedingly  useful  on  ship-board  for  various 
purposes.  To  send  three  boats  with  their  crews  was  but 
the  work  of  a few  minutes ; but  for  the  boats  to  approach 
the  rugged  rocks  in  a prodigious  surf,  and  land  their 


214 


SOUTH  SEA 


crews  with  safety  upon  them,  was  a different  affair,  and 
which  required  great  care  and  practical  knowledge  to 
manage  with  success ; for  we  could  very  soon  see  that 
the  rollers  or  breakers  were  setting  upon  the  island  with 
awful  force. 

The  rocks  formed  inclined  planes  nearly  on  all  sides, 
ascending  to  a blunt  peak  in  the  centre,  but  the  surface 
was  full  of  ravines;  and  all  around  the  greater  mass, 
when  the  sea  recoiled,  small  points  of  rocks  or  jutting 
crags,  could  be  seen  in  great  numbers  surrounding  it. 
To  pass  through  these  dangers  was  necessary,  of  course, 
before  the  crew  could  land  upon  the  central  rocks 
that  formed  the  resting  place  of  the  seals,  which  had 
taken  up,  as  they  generally  do,  a place  naturally  well 
fortified  from  the  incursions  of  marauders  such  as  we 
were ; but  our  captain  was  a man  who  thought  such 
things  mere  trifles, —he  gave  the  command,  and  away 
they  all  went,  while  I thought  proper  to  accompany 
them,  as  I generally  did  all  boat  excursions,  to  observe 
their  doings  for  my  own  gratification.  But  when  we 
arrived  within  a cabled  length  of  the  rocks,  the  dan- 
gerous nature  of  the  surf  was  rendered  more  manifest, 
so  that  we  were  obliged  to  make  a circuit  of  the  whole 
group,  to  discover  some  spot  of  the  least  dangerous  kind 
on  which  to  make  our  descent ; we  quickly  made  our 
choice,  and  the  boats5  heads  were  placed  in  its  direction ; 
we  soon  got  very  near  the  shore,  and  soon  we  rose  upon 
the  top  of  a mountainous  sea,  which  set  in  with  danger- 
ous swiftness  to  the  rocks ; in  a few  seconds  we  were 
close  up  with  them,  and  all  but  two  in  each  boat  were 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


215 


ready  to  leap  upon  their  craggy  eminences ; the  proper 
time  arrived,  and  we  did  so,  and  the  three  boats 
receded  immediately  with  the  falling  wave,  with  their 
diminished  crews  to  take  care  of  them,  but  not  until 
they  had  received  some  crackling  concussions  against 
the  unyielding  stone.  We  soon  found  ourselves  in  a 
most  dangerous  situation  : we  had  leaped  upon  the  rocks 
recklessly,  for  we  had  but  a moment,  while  on  the  top 
of  the  ascending  roller,  to  do  so  ; we  had  landed  with 
hundreds  of  sea  lions  in  our  front,  with  the  roaring 
ocean  behind  us,  and  with  slippery  craggy  points  and 
chasms  on  each  side. 

The  moment  before  we  left  the  boats  we  observed  a 
strange  tumult  commencing  on  the  shore,  all  the  seals 
observing  our  approach,  and  all  of  them  speedily  begin- 
ning to  make  for  the  water,  so  that  we  had  the  instant  we 
landed  about  forty  or  fifty  of  them  coming  down  directly 
upon  us,  roaring  frightfully,  and  exposing  their  enormous 
fangs  with  dreadful  fierceness,  while  some  were  making 
for  the  sea  in  various  other  directions.  It  wras  impossible 
for  us  to  retreat  one  step,  for  the  foaming  water  every 
moment  appeared  endeavouring  to  snatch  us  from  our 
natural  element,  and  enwrap  us  in  its  merciless  folds. 
The  monsters  came  sliding  and  rolling  down  the  rocky 
precipices  with  considerable  celerity,  using  their  fins 
against  the  craggy  points,  and  forcing  themselves  down 
the  slippery  way  with  great  power  and  impetuosity, 
roaring  all  the  time,  and  not  attempting  in  the  least  to 
avoid  us  in  their  awkward  flight,  their  sole  object  being 
evidently  to  gain  the  water.  Before  we  had  time  for 


210 


SOUTH  SEA 


reflection  we  found  ourselves  in  close  contact  with  them, 
and  their  glistening  fangs  were  within  a few  feet  of  us, 
while  their  growling  was  awfully  fierce  and  loud.  Still 
nearer  they  came  ; no  stop  was  made,  although  they  saw 
us  directly  in  their  front.  But  just  as  the  monsters 
were  about  to  drive  us  into  the  sea,  just  as  their  snap- 
ping jaws  were  in  the  act  of  seizing  one  of  our  compa- 
nions, Jack  Palmer,  who  was  in  our  van,  commenced  a 
furious  attack  upon  them  with  a club,  a weapon  with 
which  we  were  all  supplied,  and  the  New  Zealander,  to 
whom  the  above  name  was  given  by  our  crew,  dealt 
his  blows  around  both  thick  and  heavy,  which  proved 
the  signal  for  a general  attack  ; we  all  followed  his 
example,  and  in  a few  minutes  twenty  of  these  marine 
beasts,  which  only  just  before  had  threatened  to  destroy 
the  whole  of  us,  were  to  be  seen  rolling  and  sliding 
down  the  rocks  in  a stunned  or  half  insensible  state. 
But  although  we  had  succeeded  in  rendering  them 
harmless  wTith  respect  to  their  jaws,  they  still  continued 
to  descend  upon  us  in  consequence  of  the  convulsive 
movements  of  their  fins  continuing  to  act  upon  the 
craggy  points  in  such  a manner  as  to  favour  the  weight 
of  their  bodies  slipping  down  an  inclined  beach,  which 
was  exceedingly  slippery  from  their  constant  j>assage  to 
and  fro  over  it.  We  were  obliged  to  climb  over  the 
bodies  of  the  conquered  as  they  came  rolling  upon  us, 
to  finish  the  victory  which  we  had  commenced  so  glo- 
riously, and  as  the  upper  ones  descended  they  met  with 
the  same  fate  as  their  companions.  But  while  we  were 
congratulating  ourselves  upon  the  nature  of  our  escape, 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


217 


and  little  danger  appearing  to  us  from  any  object  upon 
the  land,  one  of  the  largest  and  most  furious  male  seals  I 
had  yet  seen  was  observed  to  be  coming  down  the  rocks 
with  great  impetuosity,— his  glossy  mane  shaking  in  the 
wind,  defiance  depicted  in  his  eye,  his  extended  jaws 
exposing  an  immense  cavity,  armed  with  well-set  rows 
of  polished  teeth,— but  our  New  Zealander  resolutely 
advanced  to  meet  him,  and  with  his  usual  courage,  dex» 
terity  and  strength,  inflicted  a heavy  blow  upon  the 
forehead  of  his  antagonist,  but  it  had  not  the  effect  of 
much  retarding  his  career,  while  another  of  our  party, 
who  had  obtained  possession  of  a harpoon,  plunged  it 
into  the  monster’s  side,  and  endeavoured  to  restrain 
his  progress  by  fastening  a line  to  which  the  harpoon 
was  attached  round  some  of  the  jutting  points  of  rock, 
but  the  wounded  animal  became  exceedingly  furious-- 
foaming  and  gnashing  his  teeth  with  intense  rage  and 
vigour,  and,  dashing  into  the  midst  of  us,  carried  off 
one  of  our  companions  who  became  entangled  in  a coil 
of  the  harpoon  rope,  and  still  continuing  his  course,  the 
gushing  and  rolling  waves  ascended  and  carried  them 
both  away  in  their  wild  and  cold  embrace ! 

We  were  all  ready,  when  we  saw  the  miserable  fate  of 
our  companion,  to  plunge  headlong  into  the  agitated 
waters  to  rescue  him  from  his  terrible  situation,  but  in 
the  next  instant  we  saw  him  struggling  on  the  top  of 
an  enormous  wave,  at  too  great  a distance  to  have 
been  of  the  slightest  service  even  if  we  had  done  so  ; he 
then  again  disappeared,  and  our  last  ray  of  hope  sank 
within  us — -we  heard  “ the  bubbling  cry  of  the  strong 

L 


218 


SOUTH  SEA 


swimmer  in  his  agony but  another  enormous  roller 
appeared ; again  he  is  seen  struggling  on  its  snowy 
bosom— he  approaches  the  shore—he  is  borne  in  rapidly 
—we  spontaneously  clasp  each  other’s  hands  and  form  a 
living  chain— the  breakers  roll  over  the  heads  of  those 
nearest  to  him— a desperate  effort  is  made,  and  he  is 
snatched  from  the  watery  grave ! the  receding  waves 
leave  him  again  in  our  possession  amid  cheers  and 
heartfelt  thanksgivings  ; the  poor  fellow  was  dreadfully 
bruised  against  the  rocks,  and  his  exhaustion  was  ex- 
treme, but  a few  days’  rest,  with  a little  proper  attention, 
soon  restored  him  to  his  wonted  health  and  spirits. 

I now  left  my  companions,  and  ascended  the  rugged 
rocks  to  their  highest  elevation,  where,  on  looking  round 
at  the  various  objects  which  were  presented  to  my  view, 

I was  forcibly  struck  with  the  many  rare  beauties  which 
they  possessed.  Looking  to  the  west,  which  was  even 
beyond  the  “ far  west”  of  Hoffman,  there  was  the  vast 
ocean  lazily  rolling,  agitated  by  some  distant  wind,  for 
at  this  spot  naught  but  gentle  zephyrs  play  during  the 
whole  year.  The  sea-bird  could  be  seen,  sometimes 
soaring  high  in  the  air,  and  sometimes  suddenly  dashing 
into  the  sea  to  secure  its  prey,  the  moment  afterwards 
emerging  from  it,  uttering  its  wild  shriek,  and  retreating 
from  the  scene  to  devour  its  writhing  victim. 

Around  the  island  on  which  I stood,  the  ocean  was 
dashing  itself  into  a thousand  fantastic  shapes  ; while  ' 
on  one  side  of  the  rock,  which  was  nearly  perpendicular, 
a large  arch-like  opening  was  seen,  which  formed  the 
way  from  the  sea  into  an  immense  and  partly  unroofed 


WHALING  VOYAGE, 


219 


cavern,  which  embraced  a large  portion  of  the  centre  of 
the  island ; the  waves  every  half  minute  rushed  through 
this  opening  with  exceeding  force  and  quantity,  filling 
the  cave  with  foam,  and  causing  a considerable  vibration 
of  the  whole  island.  As  I stood  observing  the  broken 
seas  which  every  now  and  then  rushed  into  the  cavern, 
I saw  the  sea  lion,  which  had  been  struck  with  the  har- 
poon, forced  by  the  waves  through  the  opening  I have 
mentioned  in  company  with  another  of  the  same  size. 
Near  the  centre  of  the  cavern  they  came  in  close  contact, 
and  then  commenced  between  them  one  of  the  most 
savage  encounters  that  it  was  ever  my  fortune  to  wit- 
ness : whether  the  wounded  one  took  the  other  for  his 
destroyer,  or  from  what  cause  it  arose  it  is  impossible 
for  me  to  conjecture,  but  the  harpooned  one  immediately 
seized  the  other  by  the  throat  with  the  most  savage 
fierceness,  while  the  victim  of  his  ferocity  returned  the 
act  by  seizing  his  antagonist  by  the  side  of  the  head. 
In  this  struggle  they  were  joined  by  the  broken  and 
roaring  billows,  that  dashed  them  to  and  fro  with  great 
velocity.  In  their  vehement  struggles  for  the  mastery, 
sometimes  they  could  be  seen  on  the  top  of  the  snow- 
white  surf,  which  became  tinged  with  their  blood  ; they 
would  then  totally  disappear,  and  in  a few  minutes  they 
would  again  be  seen  close  to  the  craggy  sharp  pointed 
rocks,  and  apparently  escape  being  dashed  to  pieces 
against  them  by  mere  miracle.  But  after  I had  wit- 
nessed this  wild  conflict  for  about  four  or  five  minutes, 
a vast  wave  came  rushing  foaming  through  the  archway 
from  the  sea ; an  extraordinary  agitation  was  caused  in 


220 


SOUTH  SEA 


the  cavern  by  its  force,  forming  a circuit,  a wild  whirling 
eddy,  which  carried  both  the  infuriated  beasts  into  the 
sea,  and  I saw  them  no  more* 

I now  returned  to  the  people  I had  left,  crossing  in 
my  route  a small  descending  plain,  upon  which  wrer@ 
huddled  together  thousands  of  young  birds,  called  by 
mariners  u shags.”  It  was  their  breeding  time;  a few 
were  lying  together  in  each  nest,  which  was  a mere 
shallow  hollow,  scooped  out  of  the  ordure  which  covered 
the  island,  in  places  to  a considerable  depth ; they 
were  so  unaccustomed  to  danger  of  any  kind,  that  I 
had  a great  deal  of  difficulty  in  passing  through  their 
numbers  without  walking  over  them.  I also  saw  here 
several  beautiful  king  penguins,  and  a few  wild  turkeys. 
I found  our  sailors  busily  engaged  with  the  skins  of  the 
seals  they  had  killed,  fifty-two  in  number,  with  which 
we  soon  after  returned  to  the  ship,  experiencing  the 
same  difficulty  in  embarking  as  we  had  done  before  in 
disembarking,  but  which  we  accomplished  in  perfect 
safety.  As  we  were  going  on  board  the  ship,  the  boat 
in  which  I happened  to  be,  came  in  contact  with  a large 
grey  pelican,  which  seemed  to  know  so  little  of  the  reck" 
ieoS  cruelty  of  man,  that  it  suffered  itself  to  be  quietly 
taken  with  a common  boat-hook,  which  was  placed 
round  its  neck,  and  with  which  it  was  hauled  alongside. 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


CHAPTER  II. 


We  now  continued  our  course,  still  keeping  the  land 
in  sight  — the  land  of  Peru*  the  land  of  gold,  and 
of  the  sun-worshippers ; of  terrific  earthquakes,  of 
the  volcanic  Andes,  or  Cordilleras,  of  the  vast  and  ver- 
dant Pampas  ; the  land  of  the  people  who  were  basely 
conquered  by  Pizarro,  himself  a mere  bastard  and  swine- 
feeder,  who,  with  his  compeers,  Diego  de  Almagro  and 
Hernando  Lugue,  the  former  a foundling  and  the  latter 
a priest  and  schoolmaster,  who  found  money  for  the 
expedition,  managed,  by  their  wily  schemes,  revolting 
cruelties,  base  ingratitude,  and  horrible  treachery,  to 
conquer  a harmless,  virtuous,  and  industrious  people ; 
destroyed  their  liberty,  robbed  them  of  their  homes,  their 
wealth,  and  the  land  of  their  birth,  caused  them  to  obey 
the  most  obnoxious  and  tyrannical  laws,  and  at  last 
crowning  the  direful  catalogue  of  crimes  which  stain  the 
annals  of  that  conquest,  by  the  murder  of  6 1 Tupac 
Amaru,”  the  last  king  of  the  Children  of  the  Sun. 

An  instance  of  their  conduct  to  Atabalipa,  one  of 
their  incas  or  kings,  will  plainly  shew  the  nature  of 
the  arts  which  the  Spaniards  employed  to  conquer  the 
unfortunate  Peruvians.  The  Inca  Atabalipa  having 
been  taken  prisoner  in  an  engagement  which  he  and  his 
subjects  had  with  Pizarro  and  his  band,  quickly  disco- 
vered that  the  ruling  passion  of  the  Spaniards  was 


222 


SOUTH  SEA 


avarice*  and  therefore  to  regain  his  liberty  he  offered 
them  an  enormous  ransom*  He  was  confined  in  an 
apartment  twenty-two  feet  long  and  sixteen  feet  broad* 
and  such  were  the  riches  of  the  Inca*  that  he  offered  to 
fill  this  room  with  vessels  of  gold  as  high  as  he  could 
reach*  if  Pizarro  would  restore  him  to  liberty*  and  lines 
were  drawn  upon  the  walls  of  his  prison  to  mark  the 
height  to  which  the  treasure  was  to  rise*  Atabalipa  per- 
formed his  promise,  and  the  immense  mass  of  precious 
metal  amounted  to  the  value  of  400,000/. ! When 
the  conquerors  assembled  to  share  the  spoils  of  this 
innocent  people*  their  chaplain*  Vincent  Valverde*  com- 
menced with  an  invocation  to  heaven,  as  if  they  ex- 
pected the  guidance  of  God  in  distributing  the  wages  of 
their  iniquity— thus  mixing  with  their  other  infamous 
acts,  that  of  impiety  itself.  They  divided  the  spoils 
according  to  the  dignity  of  their  ranks ; about  8000 
pesos*  or  10,000/.  sterling,  falling  to  the  share  of  a 
common  horse  soldier.  But  their  infamous  proceedings 
did  not  end  here : when  the  injured  Atabalipa  insisted 
on  their  fulfilling  the  promise  they  had  made  of  setting 
him  at  liberty*  his  just  demand  was  met  with  scorn  and 
derision. 

Pizarro,  by  a breach  of  faith  which  can  scarcely  be 
equalled  in  history,  not  only  refused  to  give  him  his 
liberty,  but*  immediately  after  dividing  his  immense 
treasures  among  the  freebooters  of  his  band,  actually 
instituted  a mock  trial  against  his  defenceless  captive- 
one  of  the  charges  in  which  was,  that  he  had  excited  his 
subjects  to  take  up  arms  against  the  Spaniards — the 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


223 


invaders  of  his  country  ; the  other  charges  against  him 
comprised  acts  which  were,  and  had  been,  the  common 
usage  of  the  kings  of  Peru  for  ages.  But  as  his  corrupt 
judges  had  predetermined,  he  was  found  guilty,  and 
condemned  to  be  burned  alive  ! While  the  wicked  Val~ 
verde,  the  friar  to  the  banditti,  prostituted  his  sacred 
calling  by  signing  with  his  own  hand  the  warrant  for 
his  execution,  and  with  sanctified  hypocrisy  attended 
the  injured  Atabalipa  at  the  place  of  execution,  and 
there  conjured  the  wretched  inca  to  abjure  the  worship 
of  the  sun,  and  turn  to  that  faith  which  had  for  its 
apparent  followers  men  who  were  capable  of  committing 
acts  at  which  the  true  Christian  turns  away  with  horror. 

The  most  cruel  measures  were  constantlv  resorted  to 
in  order  to  keep  the  Peruvians  in  subjection.  Tupac 
Amaru,  the  heir  of  their  last  king,  retreated  to  the 
mountains,  where  he  continued  to  live  for  some  time 
in  privacy  and  peace  ; but  even  here  he  was  discovered, 
and  being  soon  surrounded  by  troops  which  were  sent 
out  against  him  by  the  destroyers  of  his  country,  he 
was  obliged  to  surrender,  and  was  conveyed  to  a dun- 
geon, when  the  viceroy,  Francis  de  Toledo,  caused  him 
to  be  accused  of  crimes  which  he  had  never  committed. 
But  notwithstanding  that  his  very  accusers  were  well 
aware  of  his  entire  innocence  of  the  charges  they  had 
instituted  against  him,  he  was  beheaded  in  the  year 
1571,  while  all  the  other  descendants  of  the  inca 
shared  the  same  fate ; but  such  was  the  veneration  in 
which  Tupac  Amaru  was  held  by  the  Peruvians,  that 
while  his  cruel  conquerors  were  leading  him  to  execu- 


224 


SOUTH  SEA 


tion,  they  prostrated  themselves  in  the  streets  while  the 
air  was  rent  with  piercing  shrieks  and  wild  exclama- 
tions, mixed  with  curses  against  his  destroyers ; amidst 
which  the  last  king  of  the  children  of  the  sun  was  torn 
in  pieces  by  his  executioners. 

But  although  Pizarro  and  his  companions  succeeded 
for  a time  in  their  career  of  blood  and  rapine,  the  pun- 
ishment of  retribution  was  awarded  them  with  dreadful 
severity.  Pizarro,  after  having  caused  his  old  friend 
and  fellow  adventurer  Diego  de  Almagro  to  be  strangled 
in  prison,  for  the  sake  of  more  effectually  carrying  his 
ambitious  schemes  into  execution,  was  assassinated  in 
his  own  palace,  by  the  friends  of  Almagro,  whose  son  was 
also  beheaded  for  assuming  supreme  command,— while 
of  the  two  brothers  of  Pizarro,  Ferdinand  and  Gonzalo, 
we  find  one  suffering  death  as  a traitor,  and  the  other 
enduring  confinement  for  twenty-three  years  in  a prison, 
both  having  followed  the  same  career  of  crime  as  their 
brother  the  discoverer  had  done.  While  Carjaval,  an 
able,  but  most  ferocious  warrior,  a great  prompter  of 
the  actions  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  and  with  whom  he  was 
executed,  as  a climax  to  this  scene  of  carnage  and 
ruthless  war,  actually  boasted  at  the  place  of  execution 
that  he  had  massacred  with  his  own  hand  1400  Spa- 
niards, and  20,000  Indians  ! ! 

Such  was  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  those  men, 
who  plunged  a peaceable  and  virtuous  people  into 
wretchedness  and  despair  for  their  own  private  ambition 
and  inordinate  love  of  gain.  No  act,  however  cruel,— no 
crime  however  ghastly- — neither  the  tie  of  friendship  nor 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


225 


the  knot  of  love,— neither  parental  affection,  nor  filial 
endearment,  the  sanctity  of  the  altar,  or  the  fear  of 
eternal  punishment,  could  restrain  those  men  from 
following  their  detestable  pursuits.  Possessing  invincible 
spirits,  worthy  of  a better  cause,  they  followed  the 
dictates  of  their  uncontrolled  passions  ; until  justice, 
with  her  “leaden  feet  ” but  “ iron  hands,”  grasped  them 
with  a relentless  hold,  and  hurried  them  all  into  that 
oblivious  shade,  in  which  their  career  of  guilt  was  finally 
concluded. 

Such  have  been  a few  of  the  scenes  which  have  been 
enacted  in  Peru,  a country  which  at  one  time  filled  the 
Spanish  coffers  to  an  overflow.  And  when  the  travel- 
ler  finds  himself  situated  under  its  enormous  moun- 
tains, when  he  mixes  with  its  people,  or  when  he  glides 
on  its  own  ocean,  past  its  rocky  shores,  those  remi- 
niscences of  its  history  may  serve  to  occupy  his  leisure 
hours  in  reflecting  upon  the  ways  of  man,  the  tumults 
he  can  raise,  and  the  crimes  he  can  commit. 


226 


SOUTH  SEA 


CHAPTER  IIL 


Still  continuing  our  course  along  the  coast  of  Peru,  we, 
on  the  6th  of  March  1831,  arrived  at  Paita,  at  which  we 
cast  anchor  for  a short  time.  As  a town  it  is  scarcely 
worthy  of  remark  ; a few  straggling  houses,  or  more 
properly  huts,  are  built  upon  an  arid  sand,  and  such  is 
the  dearth  of  water  at  this  place,  that  the  inhabitants 
are  obliged  to  have  it  brought  from  a place  which  is  six 
leagues^  or  eighteen  miles  distant;  besides  which,  they 
never  have  any  rain,  or  very  rarely,  for  some  of  the 
people  informed  me  that  they  had  not  seen  any  for  three 
years.  The  place,  in  consequence,  appears  an  arid 
desert ; everything  around  is  as  dry  as  tinder,  and  the 
bright  glare  of  the  sun  at  mid-day  is  intense,  with  the 
atmosphere  as  clear  as  crystal.  Not  a shrub  nor  a tree, 
nor  even  a morsel  of  herbage,  can  be  seen  in  any  direc- 
tion— everything  appears  burnt  up  by  the  intolerable 
heat  of  the  sun. 

From  some  masses  of  broken  rock  which  projected 
into  the  bay,  I saw  a few  persons  angling,  while  the  fish 
they  were  endeavouring  to  catch  could  easily  be  seen 
gliding  in  and  out  of  the  various  crannies  of  the  rock, 
appearing  to  know  their  enemies  exceedingly  well,  from 
the  cautious  manner  with  which  they  observed  the  bait, 
and  the  few  victims  which  immolated  themselves  at  the 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


227 


shrine  of  gluttony.  A number  of  Creole  Spaniards  came 
on  board  the  ship,  lounging  about,  and  endeavouring  to 
bargain  with  the  sailors.  All  of  them  possessed  large 
bags,  in  which  they  carried  their  articles  of  traffic, 
w'hich  principally  consisted  of  a peculiar  kind  of  hat, 
which  being  extremely  light  is  exceedingly  well  adapted 
for  wear  in  hot  climates ; they  are  made  of  a kind  of 
grass,  wrhich  is  plaited  into  broad-brimmed  hats  of  neat 
appearance.  They  appeared  extremely  anxious  to 
trade,  but  appeared  averse  to  an  erect  position ; lying 
on  a hen-coop  or  leaning  over  a rail,  they  would  urge 
their  business  with  great  assiduity,  all  their  muscles 
lying  idle  except  those  of  the  tongue,  which  were  put 
into  play  with  amazing  volubility. 

After  having  left  this  place,  and  continued  our  course 
farther  north  for  about  five  degrees,  we  came  to  Monta 
Christa,  a town  of  that  name,  which  stands  upon  a 
mountain  which  suddenly  rises  from  low  lands  that  are 
situated  all  around.  It  rears  its  lofty  head  only  thirty 
miles  south  of  the  equinoctial  line,  and  bears  the  same 
name  as  that  of  the  town  (which  is  formed  upon  its 
waist),  to  which  it  no  doubt  gave  origin. 

It  is  wonderful  that  only  five  degrees  of  latitude 
should  make  such  a difference  with  regard  to  vegetation. 
We  had  only  just  left  perfect  aridity  and  barrenness ; 
and  now,  in  a few  days’  sailing  along  the  same  coast,  we 
came  to  perfect  irrigation  and  fertility : a place  not  only 
abounding  in  vegetable  life,  but  also  in  a multitude  of 
various  living  creatures,  but  more  particularly  birds  ; 
and  great  varieties  of  beautiful  insects,  among  which 


228 


SOUTH  SEA 


those  that  are  commonly  called  butterflies  of  the  golden 
kind,  were  exceedingly  large  and  beautiful,  and  beyond 
description  in  their  richness  of  colours— while  the  leaves 
of  various  plants  wrere  covered  by  caterpillars  of  great 
beauty,  some  of  them  being  nearly  as  large  as  one’s 
finger;  numerous  creeping  insects  of  the  beetle  kind 
here  sparkled  in  the  sun’s  rays,  exposing  their  metallic- 
looking  coverings  of  various  hues— large  wasps,  which 
built  their  swallow -like  nests  in  great  numbers  upon 
the  branches  of  trees,  cautioned  you  not  to  approach  too 

near  to  their  well-watched  and  protected  habitations,  for 

{ 

on  any  sudden  sound  or  disturbance,  a thousand  well- 
armed  sentinels,  with  poisoned  spears  and  wings  of 

swiftest  speed,  rushed  forth  and  inflicted  such  wounds 

* 

upon  the  intruders  as  would  cause  the  most  brave  to 
fly.  Some  of  our  wood- choppers  found  this  to  their 
cost,  for,  on  going  on  shore  one  day  to  fell  some  trees, 
they  began  to  amuse  themselves  with  throwing  stones 
at  their  nests,  which  were  situated  in  considerable  num- 
bers on  the  branches  of  one  large  tree.  They  had  not 
enjoyed  their  destructive  amusement  for  more  than  a few 
minutes  when  they  found  themselves  surrounded  by 
great  numbers  of  large  wasps,  which  flew  about  their 
heads  with  lightning-like  velocity,  striking  against  their 
faces  with  great  force,  attempting  to  sting.  For  once 
our  jack-tars  instantly  saw  their  danger,  and  we  all 
scampered  at  our  greatest  speed  down  a moderately 
steep  hill,  which  fortunately  increased  our  rate  consi- 
derably, or  I do  not  know  what  the  end  would  have 
been.  Although  it  was  amusing  enough  to  see  about  a 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


229 


dozen  brawny  men  running  away  with  all  their  might 
down  a hill,  flinging  their  arms  about  to  keep  off  their 
little  assailants,  and  screaming  out  at  the  top  of  their 
voices  from  fear  of  their  pigmy  stilettos,— we  found  it 
necessary  to  keep  up  our  retreat  for  upwards  of  a quarter 
of  a mile  before  our  determined  pursuers  gave  up  the 
chase,  who  no  doubt  much  enjoyed  their  victory.  As  it 
was,  we  found  several  of  our  crew  wounded ; one  in  a 
very  dangerous  place,  the  sting  having  passed  through 
the  upper  eye-lid,  and  which  confined  him  several  days* 
When  I commenced  my  first  journey  to  the  town,  which 
is  situated  about  eight  miles  from  the  port  of  Manta,  the 
road  being  nearly  all  the  way  through  a thick  wood, 
which  is  formed  of  the  beautiful  cotton  tree,  that  on  our 
visit  appeared  in  full  bloom,  and  the  gigantic  cactus, 
which  grows  to  thirty  feet  in  height  and  of  great  thick- 
ness, and  other  beautiful  trees  and  elegant  shrubs,  I 
was  astonished  at  the  great  variety  of  rare  and  exquisite 
birds  which  here  careered  in  their  own  native  air,  and 
warbled  in  the  quiet  shades  of  their  own  wild  woods. 
Although  I have  visited  so  many  various  places  and 
climes,  I never  saw  half  the  number  of  beautiful  birds 
during  the  whole  time  of  my  wandering  as  I had  here 
suddenly  presented  to  me  during  my  short  journey  to  the 
town.  The  woods  were  actually  thronged  with  them— 
from  the  great  silvery  buzzard  to  the  busy  humming- 
bird appeared  one  vast  chain  of  many-coloured  links. 
One  moment,  a flight  of  lovely  azure  ones  provoked  your 
admiration,  and,  on  their  journey  ending,  the  next,'  in 
some  shady  grove  or  thickset  jungle,  your  eye  rested 


230 


SOUTH  SEA 


on  another,  with  plumage  of  a golden  yellow,  mutely 
fixed  on  some  green  bough,  lengthy  and  taper-streaking 
with  its  beauteous  form  the  gloomy  shade.  Others,  of 
the  purest  white,  animated  the  forest  scene,  like  the 
chaste  snow-drop  emerging  frotn  the  dusky  earth ; while 
strutted  not  far  distant,  proudly  disdaining  to  exert  its 
flight,  the  golden  pheasant,  his  neck  bespangled  with  a 
thousand  hues.  Every  step  that  was  taken  aroused 
some  drowsy  lizard,  basking  in  the  sun’s  rays,  which 
shot  suddenly  and  with  remarkable  swiftness  into  its 
subterranean  abode  in  the  dry  bank  or  stony  cleft;— 
now  and  then  the  buz  of  the  busy  humming-bird  fell 
faintly  upon  the  ear,  and  other  winged  music,  shrill  and 
sudden,  melancholy,  slow,  or  that  of  richest  melody, 
delighted  the  traveller  through  the  forest  way ; and  when 
the  shades  of  evening  enwrapped  those  beauties  in  its 
sable  folds,  then,  amidst  the  ambrosial  airs  which  rose 
from  the  scented  shrubs  or  flowery  fields,  the  fire-fly 
could  be  seen  flitting  in  the  darkened  space,  lighting 
itself  along  its  gloomy  road,  or,  with  its  flickering  light 
searching  for  dainty  sips  of  the  rich  nectar  which  various 
flowers  distilled. 

When  1 arrived  at  the  town  I was  immediately  beset 
by  numbers  of  people  who  were  labouring  under  various 
diseases,  all  greeting  me  with  great  warmth.  It  was 
“come  esta,J  from  some,  and  “bon  physico”  from 
others ; and  all  of  them  exerted  themselves  to  return  by 
any  means  in  their  power  the  favours  they  received* from 
me,  and  I did  the  best  I could  for  all  of  them  while 
I remained  among  them.  The  house  at  which  I lodged 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


231 


was  surrounded  early  and  late  with  candidates  for  advice 
and  medicines,  in  return  for  which  some  presented  me 
with  a small  quantity  of  fresh  butter,  others  with  a few 
eggs,  while  some  of  the  richer  sort  brought  fowls,  or  hats 
of  curious  workmanship. 

Here  indeed  I witnessed  dreadful  scenes  of  sickness 
and  lingering  deaths,  and  not  a single  medical  man  of 
any  kind  resided  among  them  to  relieve  their  pains,  and 
therefore  stern  disease,  of  which  there  existed  a great 
variety,  took  its  painful  course  unchecked.  The  liver 
disease  appeared  to  be  the  most  common  complaint 
among  them,  and  which  was  of  a most  active  and  painful 
kind ; but  opthalmia,  consumption,  and  various  active 
inflammatory  affections  were  common.  In  my  opinion 
they  were  all  caused  by  the  inhabitants  of  this  place 
foolishly  exposing  themselves  to  what  they  termed  the 
evening  sea-breeze,  which  began  to  blow  in  from  the 
sea  a little  before  sunset,  which  was  certainlv  cool  and 
refreshing  enough  after  the  intense  heat  and  sultriness 
of  mid-day,  but  I soon  discovered  danger  lurking  in  the 
luxury  and  avoided  it.  Shocking  cases  every  day  met 
my  view : in  one  house  the  mother  of  a fine  family  lay 
suffering  from  the  effects  of  an  inflammation  of  the 
lungs,  and  no  hope  remained  of  her  ultimate  recovery ; 
but  the  most  distressing  part  of  her  unfortunate  condi- 
tion was,  that  there  was  not  a soul  in  the  whole  country 
around  that  knew  how  to  soothe  her  declining  hours  by 
medical  aid.  There  she  lay ; her  fond  children  tendered 
her  the  cup  of  nourishment,  made  with  the  greatest  care, 
but  the  parched  lip  and  furred  tongue  tasted  not,  while 


232 


SOUTH  SEA 


the  groan  of  anguish  proclaimed  the  aching  side  and 
burning  head. 

An  old  woman  one  day  urgently  requested  ine  to 
accompany  her  to  her  son’s  house  to  witness  his  suffer- 
ings and  try  to  relieve  him.  I found  him  stretched 
upon  his  low  bed,  his  once  fine  frame  wasted  from 
long  continued  disease.  I shall  never  forget  the  poor 
woman’s  affecting  conduct  as  I administered  some  medi- 
cine to  her  suffering  son  ; with  what  intense  fervour  the 
fond  mother  blessed  the  medicine  and  the  hand  that  gave 
it,— how  hope  sprang  uppermost  in  her  imagination,— 
how  powerfully  maternal  love  evinced  itself,— what 
fervent  pleading  to  heaven  was  made  use  of  by  the  dis- 
tracted mother  as  she  gazed  with  the  purest  affection 
upon  her  unfortunate  child.  All  that  I could  do  to 
relieve  their  sufferings  I did  with  that  kind  of  pleasure 
which  evinces  itself  wrhen  we  feel  that  we  have  been 
doing  good.  And  when  the  time  arrived  for  taking  our 
departure  from  this  scene  of  romance— this  garden  of 
the  tropics— this  grand  natural  aviary— I received  many 
sincere  thanks  from  the  people  who  dwelt  within  its 
shades. 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


On  the  28th  of  March  1831,  our  sails  were  again 
unfurled,  and  refreshing  breezes  soon  wafted  us  from 
Monta  Christa.  Our  friends,  and  among  them  many  a 
dark-eyed  maid,  watched  the  gradually  dissolving  form 
of  our  ship  as  she  ploughed  and  glided  over  the  blue 
waters  that  every  moment  widened  the  distance  which 
intervened  between  us,  while  we  sailed  along  the  equi- 
noctial line  and  ran  down  our  longitude  to  the  west. 
Thousands  of  flying  squid,  medusae,  and  polipi  now 
crowded  the  limpid  waves,  and  about  four  days’  sail  from 
Monta  Christa  we  fell  in  with  a school  of  female  sperm 
whales,  which  were  the  first  we  had  yet  seen,  although 
we  had  now  been  absent  from  England  about  six  months, 
and  a good  “look  out”  had  been  kept  for  them  the 
whole  of  that  time.  The  three  mates  were  put  upon 
their  first  trial  of  skill  this  voyage,  and  the  bustle  of  the 
chase  commenced ; and  in  a short  time  they  were  for- 
tunate enough  to  prove  their  prowess  by  bringing  along- 
side the  ship  four  slain  monsters  of  the  deep,  amid  the 
well-merited  cheers  and  congratulations  of  their  fellow- 
adventurers.  On  the  sixth  day  from  our  departure  from 
the  shore  we  again  saw  whales,  but  we  did  not  succeed 
in  taking  any  of  them,  and  all  sail  was  crowded  upon 
our  gallant  bark  for  the  Sandwich  Islands,  on  our  way 


234 


SOUTH  SEA 


to  the  Japan  fishery.  We  passed  very  near  to  the 
Galapagos  Islands,  so  long  renowned  among  marine 
travellers  for  their  “ Terepin”  rocks  and  Guanoes,  but  no 
sail  was  taken  in,  no  stop  was  made  on  their  account — 
the  captain  wishing  to  be  on  the  Japan  fishing-ground 
in  June. 

On  the  evening  of  the  4th  of  May  1831,  our  black 
cook  declared  that  he  could  see  land  ahead ; but  as  the 
captain  had  taken  his  observations  the  same  day,  we 
calculated  that  we  were  upwards  of  ninety  miles  from 
Owhyhee,  one  of  the  Sandwich  Islands  ; and  as  no  one 
else  in  the  ship  could  perceive  anything  of  the  kind,  we 
could  scarcely  believe  our  culinary  shipmate,  or  give 
him  credit  for  his  lengthy  sight ; but  the  next  morning 
everything  was  set  at  rest  by  the  full  appearance  of  that 
magnificent  island.  I arose  at  day-break,  even  before 
the  mistiness  of  night  had  passed  away,  and  as  the  sun’s 
rays  gradually  dispelled  the  gloom,  I strained  my  eyes 
with  eager  excitement  in  search  of  that  interesting  land ; 
and  when  the  sun  rose  fully  out  of  the  abyss  of  night, 
how  shall  I describe  the  beauties  of  the  scene  which 
presented  itself!  What  words  can  convey  the  sensations, 
the  ideas,  which  crowded  in  quick  succession  upon  my 
enraptured  mind ! The  air  was  beautifully  clear— the 
ship  was  straining  under  a press  of  sail— the  grand 
mountain  before  us  piercing  the  clouds  which  congre- 
gated around  its  peak— the  glorious  sun  cast  its  golden 
morning  rays  upon  everything  around, — all  combined  to 
render  the  first  view  of  Owhyhee  one  of  the  most 
magnificent  I had  yet  witnessed.  We  had  been  on  our 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


235 


voyage  from  Monta  Christa  and  straining  every  sail  for 
about  five  weeks ; we  had  seen  no  land  during  that 
time— not  even  the  Galapagos,  to  which  we  passed  so 
near,  but  in  the  night,— and  the  land  which  we  were 
now  approaching  presented  features  to  us  entirely  new. 
People  of  somewhat  our  own  complexion  had  as  yet 
been  our  welcomers  wherever  we  had  touched,  and 
clothed  somewhat  like  ourselves  ; but  now  we  were  about 
to  land  among  savages,  dark  and  different  in  feature, 
and  as  dissimilar  in  dress  and  manners,— we  wrere  about 
visiting  the  bay  of  Karakakoa,  the  borders  of  which  are 
stained  with  the  blood  of  the  immortal  Cook. 

If  I could  feel  so  great  an  excitement  in  beholding 
the  exceedingly  beautiful  scenery  of  this  place,  what 
must  the  discoverers  have  felt  when  they  first  found  these 
islands  ? Lying  in  the  midst  of  the  vast  North  Pacific 
Ocean,  after  having  cruised  in  search  of  land  week  after 
week,  month  after  month,  at  length  almost  despairing, 
all  on  board  dull  and  melancholy — nothing  new,  nothing 
seen  to  disturb  the  monotony  on  board— all  at  once 
rises  to  their  astonished  and  delighted  sight  a chain  of 
romantic  and  magnificent  islands,  with  a new  people, 
having  a new  language  to  any  yet  known,  new  manners 
and  customs  for  their  observation  ; no  one  can  describe 
the  feelings  which  they  must  have  enjoyed  on  that  great 


occasion. 


236 


SOUTH  SEA 


CHAPTER  V* 


When  we  arrived  near  the  land  of  Owhyhee,  we  ran 
round  its  southernmost  part,  and  then  hauling  our  wind, 
we  “ lay  to  ??  off  its  south-western  portion,  and  a boat 
was  sent  on  shore.  When  we  arrived  within  a cable’s 
length  of  the  rocks,  we  perceived  a very  heavy  surf 
breaking  upon  them,  and  we  also  saw  a great  many 
people  running  down  to  the  beach,  and  we  observed  one 
of  them  holding  up  towards  us  a piece  of  white  cloth  as 
a signal  of  peace  and  good-will.  Our  second  mate,  who 
had  visited  these  people  before,  was  acquainted  with 
their  manners,  and  felt  confident ; but  as  I had  never 
seer  anything  of  the  kind,  I could  not  help  feeling 
astonished  at  their  wild  appearance,  and  rather  alarmed 
for  our  safety  in  the  event  of  our  landing, —for  the 
natives  on  the  beach  were  entirely  naked,  except  a 
smau  piece  of  “taipa,J  or  native  cloth,  worn  around 
their  mins  ; they  were  all  making  violent  gesticulations 
with  their  arms  and  legs,  and  all  of  them  were  shouting 
at  the  top  of  their  voices,  the  sound  of  which  bore  a 
wild,  and  to  me  a fearful  character ; for  to  this  part  of 
Owhyhee  the  missionaries  had  not  paid  much  attention, 
and  consequently  the  inhabitants  enjoyed  their  own 
wild  ways  unmolested,  and  they  appeared  before  us  in 
their  natural  state.  Our  mate,  who  had  received  in- 
structions to  open  a trade  with  them  if  he  found  it 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


possible,  busied  himself  in  finding  some  place  on  the 
shore  fit  for  landing,  and  it  was  not  long  before  we  dis- 
covered a narrow  creek,  into  which  the  boat  was  steered  ; 
but  when  we  arrived  at  about  twenty  yards  from  the 
beach,  several  of  the  most  powerful  of  the  islanders 
plunged  headlong  from  the  rocks  into  the  surf,  dived 
through  its  turbulence,  and  were  quickly  by  the  side  of 
our  boat,  to  which  they  held,-— their  large  features  vari- 
ously contorted,  and  uttering  a language  with  great 
velocity,  of  which  I knew  nothing.  I was  several  times 
apprehensive  that  they  would  upset  the  boat  with  their 
violence  ; but  of  this  the  mate  informed  me  there  was 
no  fear,  for  they  are  so  dexterous  in  the  water  that 
that  they  can  do  almost  as  they  please  in  it4  With  the 
greatest  possible  ease  and  precision  we  were  soon  pro- 
pelled by  these  men  safely  through  the  surf  into  the 
creek,  and  then  a general  scramble  ensued  among  the 
people  on  the  shore  to  lay  hold  of  the  boat,— men, 
women,  and  young  girls,  all  pressing  forward  to  assist,— 
as  it  was,  they  seized  the  boat,  and  lifted  her  completely 
out  of  the  water,  with  all  of  us  still  remaining  in  her, 
and  carried  us  a considerable  distance  up  the  beach, 
and  placed  us  upon  the  grass  in  the  centre  of  a great 
number  of  people,  who  nearly  suffocated  us  with  their 
44  aroyahs  ” or  greetings.  Never  shall  I forget  the 
curious  scene  ! they  pressed  so  abruptly  upon  us  that  it 
was  a considerable  time  before  we  could  get  out  of  the 
boat  ; but  at  length  we  did  so,  and  looked  round  on  the 
remarkable  scene— the  mate  soon  commenced  a brisk 
trade  with  them,  giving  them  knives  and  scissars,  for  pigs5 


238 


SOUTH  SEA 


goats,  fowls,  and  potatos.  A great  concourse  of  naked 
men  and  women  soon  surrounded  him,  all  of  them  eager 
to  bargain ; while  a few  who  could  not  get  near  him, 
surrounded  me  and  the  sailors,  entreating  me  by  various 
curious  grimaces  to  do  the  same  as  the  mate,  which  I 
was  not  long  in  commencing. 

Not  only  the  animals  I have  mentioned  above  were 
here  offered  for  sale,  but  other  creatures  of  a more 
alluring  and  captivating  kind  presented  themselves  in  a 
row,  and  were  offered  at  an  exceedingly  low  price  by  a 
hoary  headed  chief.  A yard  of  cloth  caused  powerful 
emotions  to  arise  within  their  delicate  bosoms,  while  the 
vision  of  a white  shirt  enraptured  the  whole  throng,  their 
eyes  sparkling  upon  the  object  with  much  animation, 
and  with  such  “fine  frenzy  rolling,”  that  could  not  be 
unobserved  by  the  dullest  person  present.  We  returned 
to  the  ship  by  sunset,  with  a large  cargo  of  the  articles 
first  mentioned,  promising  to  return  the  following  day ; 
the  boat  was  loaded  at  the  place  they  had  stationed 
us  in  when  they  carried  us  up  the  beach,  and  now  on 
our  return,  they  caused  us  all  to  get  into  the  boat  again, 
and  then  commenced  another  wild  scene, — all  the  young 
men  who  could  get  near  us  lifted  her  completely  from 
the  ground,  and  carried  us  altogether  to  the  sea,  into 
which  they  carefully  launched  us  amidst  such  hideous 
yelling  that  to  the  sound  the  very  rocks  reverberated. 
Some  of  them  swimming  out  with  us,  and  piloting  the 
boat  until  she  was  free  from  the  surf,  when  they  returned 
to  the  shore,  springing  through  the  water  with  great 
powrer  and  quickness,  uttering  exulting  shouts,  which 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


239 


could  be  heard  at  a great  distance.  The  next  morning 
we  again  commenced  our  trade  with  these  free  and 
simple-hearted  people,  and  everything  was  conducted 
in  the  same  manner  as  on  the  preceding  day  ; we  ob- 
tained altogether  about  eighty  full-grown  goats,  several 
pigs,  a few  fowls,  and  a great  many  potatos,  with  about 
a dozen  fine  water-melons. 

As  the  sun  was  setting  we  bade  adieu  to  our  new 
friends,  but  not  without  some  pain  ; for  even  here  we 
had  received  many  warm-hearted  attentions  from  several 
of  the  natives,  who  signalized  themselves  by  attending  to 
our  comforts  and  accommodations  in  such  a manner  that 
could  not  prevent  the  inestimable  feeling  of  gratitude 
from  springing  up  in  our  own  bosoms. 

We  stood  along  the  shore  all  night  under  very  easy 
sail  and  very  light  wind,  while  a volcano  which  was 
burning  on  the  island  shot  its  red  gleams  around,  and 
made  “darkness  visible55  everywhere  except  in  its  own 
immediate  neighbourhood.  But  when  the  grey  mom 
peeped  from  the  brightening  east,  when  the  dark  shadows 
of  night  had  been  chased  away,  then  indeed  a grand 
picture  appeared,  which  enwrapped  the  admirer  of  nature 
in  its  labyrinth  of  beauties.  If  the  wanderer  loves  to 
contemplate  the  majestic  mountain,  here  he  may  gaze 
until  the  eye,  carried  into  the  clouds  along  its  ascending 
form,  can  reach  no  further,  and  he  is  left  to  imagine  the 
extent  above,  if  he  enjoys  the  scenes  of  rocky  glens  or 
vast  precipices,  he  can  find  them  here.  If  he  delights  in 
verdant  plains  or  woody  dells,  this  would  be  his  retreat ; 
and  if  the  extensive  ocean  in  its  turbulence  pleases  his 


240 


SOUTH  SEA 


imagination,  let  him  look  to  the  eastward  and  he  will 
find  satisfaction. 

If  the  quiet  shade  of  cocoa,  banana,  or  tamana,  have 

their  enjoyments  for  him,  with  a gentle  air  and  smooth 

unruffled  sea,  let  him  repair  to  Karakakoa’s  bay,  which 

lies  to  leeward  of  the  gigantic  Owhyhee  : there,  in  some 

wild  cavern,  rocky  glen,  or  shady  grove,  screened  from 

the  ardent  sun,  he  can  rest,  and  contemplate  those 

scenes  visited  but  by  few ; he  can  recline  upon  the 

beach,  under  the  small  tree  where  Cook  breathed  his 

last,  slain  by  the  hands  of  the  ignorant  barbarians  who 

in  the  blind  fury  of  the  moment  destroyed  their  best  of 

friends.  He  brought  them  light,  and  illuminated  the 

dark  recesses  of  their  minds  with  European  knowledge, 

and  was  rewarded  with  a grave ! But  now  that  reason 
* 

is  assuming  in  their  dark  intellects  the  progressive  form, 
the  name  of  that  hero  is  heard  only  with*  regret,  and  even 
anguish  for  the  deadly  act  which  stains  their  history. 

The  following  day  was  Sunday,  and  as  we  had  only 
had  light  airs  of  wind  in  the  night,  we  had  made  but 
little  progress.  Finding  ourselves  only  a few  miles 
from  the  land,  the  captain  sent  a boat  on  shore  to 
inquire  if  any  yams  could  be  obtained  at  this  part  of 
Owhyhee ; and  after  a long  passage  in  the  boat  under  a 
broiling  sun,  we  at  length  landed  on  the  beach,  but  we 
were  astonished  to  find  everything  totally  different  with 
regard  to  our  reception  ; scarcely  a soul  came  out  to 
meet  us— I believe  only  one  little  boy;  in  fact,  from 
its  being  Sunday,  everything  had  been  “tabooed”  by 
the  missionaries ; even  the  very  tongues  of  the  natives 


WHALING  VOYAGE e 


241 


were  restrained  or  tabooed,  for  scarcely  a word  could  we 
extract  from  them—obedient  though  discontented. 

Some  of  our  men  asked  for  water,  but  “ taboo 
was  the  slow  and  sullen  reply.  In  this  part  the  mis- 
sionaries held  supreme  sway,  to  which  the  natives  had 
been  unwillingly  subjected  by  a few  of  their  chiefs.  We 
soon  gladly  returned  to  our  ship,  after  having  been  much 
disgusted  with  the  various  scenes  which  demonstrated 
so  large  a share  of  religious  intolerance.  Many  acts  of 
extreme  oppression,  1 might  with  propriety  say  tyranny, 
could  I unfold,  if  the  limits  of  this  sketch  did  not 
preclude  me  from  so  doing ; but  far  be  it  from  me  to 
entertain  a sentiment  or  express  a word  in  disparage- 
ment of  our  holy  religion ; I only  wish  to  see  the 
beauties  of  that  faith  displayed  to  the  rude  islander 
by  enlightened  and  moral  men,  who  would  strengthen 
precept  by  example.  Will  it  be  believed,  that  when  a 
missionary  and  his  family  returned  to  Owhyhee  from  a 
general  meeting  of  his  brethren,  which  had  been  held  at 
another  island  of  the  same  group,  and  called  Oahoo, 
that  when  the  natives  of  the  place  saw  him  coming 
into  the  bay  in  his  little  sloop,  every  one  of  them 
actually  fled  from  their  homes  to  avoid  the  trouble  that 
would  have  been  inflicted  upon  them,  in  removing  him, 
his  baggage,  and  family,  a short  distance  into  the  country. 
Can  it  be  said  that  this  man  had  obtained  any  power 
over  the  minds  of  this  generous  people  by  the  kindness 
of  his  acts,  or  by  the  influence  of  his  Christian  deport  - 
ment  ?■ — as  the  Sandwich  Islanders  are  really  an  exceed- 
ingly kind  and  generous  people.  All  that  I saw  here 


M 


242 


SOUTH  SEA 


at  two  different  visits  completely  proved  to  me  the  truth 
of  this  estimation. 

An  instance  of  their  tyranny  occurred  just  before  our 
arrival  in  their  confiscating  the  humble  goods  of  a poor 
and  very  aged  woman,  because  she  had  been  detected 
smoking  tobacco;  an  indulgence  of  which  the  natives 
are  passionately  fond.  They  had  also  seized  a poor 
woman’s  pig,  perhaps  all  the  property  she  possessed, 
because  on  going  to  church  one  Sunday,  when  she  had 
arrived  near  its  porch,  happening  to  see  her  grand- 
child  at  a short  distance  from  the  path,  she  left  the  road 
to  the  church  to  go  and  kiss  her  little  favourite,  which 
being  seen  by  a missionary,  it  was  reported  of  her  that 
she  had  shewn  contempt  of  the  church,  and  the  punish- 
ment was  awarded  that  I have  mentioned  above;  and 
these  are  instances  on  the  truth  of  which  the  reader  may 
depend.  I obtained  the  information  from  a gentleman 
who  had  resided  in  those  islands  for  some  years,  and 
whose  veracity  no  one  could  doubt.  In  fact,  from  my 
own  personal  knowledge,  I could  state  many  other 
instances  in  accordance  with  the  foregoing,  but  in  doing 
so  should  digress  too  far  from  my  object  in  this  sketch 
of  a South  Sea  voyage.  And  in  closing  these  remarks 
for  the  present,  I am  sorry  to  have  to  say,  that  out  of 
the  many  missionaries  whom  I had  the  opportunity  of 
seeing,  or  of  whom  I heard,  only  one  possessed  the  good- 
will and  love  of  the  natives  among  whom  they  resided ; 
and  he  obtained  his  popularity  with  these  people  in  the 
same  manner  as  a really  good  and  religious  man  would 
among  us ; his  name  was  Platt,  and  I had  the  honour 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


243 


of  his  acquaintance  at  Bolabola,  one  of  the  Society- 
Islands.  He  had  accomplished  some  good  ; and  although 
the  natives  of  this  island  had  not  much  improved  by 
the  coercive  measures  of  the  present  missionary  princi- 
ples, still  they  could  not  help  admiring  the  honesty  of 
the  man  who  exemplified  by  his  actions  the  nature  of 
his  creed,  and  shewed  by  his  good  works  the  practice 
of  true  piety  ; as  was  declared  to  me  in  frequent  con- 
versations with  the  natives  among  whom  he  lived,  and 
acknowledged  by  them  with  fervent  expressions  of  gra- 
titude. They  stated  in  a most  emphatic  manner  that  he 
was  beloved  by  all ; their  own  words  being,  “ O Miki 
Platt  very  good  man. 55  Alas!  how  different  from  all 
that  I had  ever  heard  before  from  other  natives,  who  in- 
variably state  to  all  new-comers,  “ O Mikanary  no  good.” 
We  gradually  proceeded  from  under  the  lee  of  Owhy- 
hee,  and  then  catching  the  strong  north-east  trade 
•winds,  which  almost  constantly  blow  in  these  regions, 
we  dashed  along  at  a rapid  rate  for  Oahoo,  an  island  not 
far  distant,  belonging  to  the  same  group,  and  at  which 
the  king  and  most  of  the  principal  chiefs  reside.  The 
next  day  we  proceeded,  with  gentle  winds,  between  the 
two  islands  of  Ranai  and  Tahoorawa,  and  about  mid- 
day we  came  to  Mowee,  where  we  let  go  our  anchor  for 
a few  hours.  I went  on  shore  here  also,  but  nothing 
occurred  worthy  of  notice.  Mowee  is  a very  majestic- 
looking  island,  of  considerable  size,  and  possessing 
some  charming  and  picturesque  views,  which  I shah, 
attempt  to  describe  in  another  part  of  this  sketch.  In 
a few  hours  our  anchor  was  again  weighed,  all  sail 


244 


SOUTH  SEA 


crowded,  and  we  were  once  more  on  our  voyage  to  the 
seat  of  government,  passing  between  the  islands  of 
Ranai  and  Morotoi  with  a strong  wind,  which  blew  at 
times  with  great  fury  through  the  gorges  formed  by  the 
various  islands  I have  mentioned,  but  on  a sea  rendered 
smooth  by  the  proximity  of  the  land.  We  arrived  at 
Oahoo,  after  a furious  passage,  in  which  we  had  sailed 
at  times  at  the  rate  of  twelve  knots  an  hour.  Nothing 
remarkable  occurred  in  this  short  passage,  except  that 
we  saw  some  very  fine  flying-fish ; they  were  about  the 
size  of  a mackerel,  being  the  largest  I had  yet  seen. 
We  also  saw  a water-spout,  at  the  western  end  of 
Morotoi,  which  appeared  to  be  acting  with  great  fury, 
sometimes  whirling  over  the  borders  of  the  sea,  and 
sometimes  breaking  and  forming  a whirlwind  upon  the 
edge  of  the  land. 

After  we  had  arrived  in  the  roads  of  Oahoo,  and  let 
go  our  anchor,  the  captain  and  myself  were  soon  in  the 
town,  and  although  it  was  so  late,  being  past  ten  p.m.,  I 
was  quickly  introduced  to  comfortable  quarters,  under 
the  hospitable  roof  of  Dr.  Rooke,  who  had,  and  I believe 
still  has  the  principal  practice  among  the  upper  class  of 
its  population,  including  the  natives  and  white  residents 
of  the  place.  I need  only  say  that  he  is  a gentleman 
who  is  well  known  and  respected  at  the  island  on  which 
he  resides.  Clever  in  his  profession,  and  with  a mind 
stored  with  useful  information,  it  is  no  wonder  that  he  is 
so  much  valued  by  the  whole  population  of  the  place, 
which  he  certainly  much  honours  with  his  residence,  and 
I embrace  this  opportunity  of  thankfully  acknowledging 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


245 


the  many  kindnesses  which  I received  at  his  hands 
during  my  stay  at  the  island  of  Oahoo. 

On  the  morning  after  our  arrival  I commenced  jour- 
neying about  in  search  of  adventures,  and  I found  many 
objects  of  great  interest  to  engage  my  attention ; and 
wishing  the  short  description  which  I shall  now  give  of 
these  islands  to  be  as  interesting  to  the  general  reader 
as  it  is  possible  for  me  to  make  it,  I have  ventured  to 
include  in  the  following  tale  a description  of  the  natural 
scenery  of  some  parts  of  Oahoo,  of  the  manners  and 
customs  of  its  people,  their  mode  of  expressing  their 
ideas,  the  proper  names  of  persons  who  are  now  living 
at  that  place,  and  the  way  in  which  many  of  their  bad 
customs  were  abolished. 


KINAU  AND  TUANOA; 

A TALE  OF  THE  SANDWICH  ISLANDS. 

A heavy  gloom  was  upon  the  minds  of  the  people  of 
Oahoo,  in  consequence  of  the  recent  death  of  their  king 
Hoapili;  melancholy  filled  their  hearts,  wailings  and 
lamentations  of  various  kinds  were  heard  over  all  parts 
of  the  island,— every  grade  mourned  for  the  regal  victim 
of  death ; and  men,  women,  and  children  were  seen  tear- 
ing their  hair,  wounding  themselves  with  sharp-pointed 
weapons,  tearing  their  flesh  with  sharks’  teeth,  and 
breaking  their  own  front  teeth  with  stones,  to  convince 
each  other  of  the  acuteness  of  their  sorrows ; and,  above 
all,  they  prepared,  as  was  their  usual  custom  on  such 
events,  to  offer  up  to  the  Great  Spirit  five  human  beings 


246 


SOUTH  SEA 


as  a sacrifice ! Many  a loving  maiden,  when  she  heard 
of  the  king’s  death,  felt  a pang  rush  through  her  heart, 
and  a whirling  through  her  brain,  when  she  thought  of 
the  youth  who  had  won  her  affections.  On  such  occa- 
sions it  was  usual  for  the  Erie,  or  chief  of  each  district, 
to  select  a young  man  from  that  part  of  the  country  over 
which  he  had  control,  and  to  send  him  to  the  proper 
place  as  one  of  the  victims  to  be  immolated  at  the  shrine 
of  the  deceased  king,  so  that  there  was  a dreadful  uncer- 
tainty in  the  minds  of  the  whole  people,  until  the  unfor- 
tunates were  chosen ; and  there  was  no  appeal  against  the 
will  of  the  chief,  so  that,  when  the  summons  was  made, 
there  remained  no  hope  for  the  unhappy  chosen  one. 

In  the  village  of  Waikukii,  of  which  Nahi  was  the 
chieftain  or  erie,  lived  Tuanoa,  a young  man,  and 
Kinau,  his  betrothed  bride.  They  had  resided  near  each 
other  from  their  infancy,  and  even  in  that  early  dawning 
of  the  mind  and  the  affections  they  were  observed  con- 
stantly together,  and  no  doubt  at  that  time  there  was 
interwoven  with  their  young  heart-strings  the  tender  pas- 
sion of  love,  that  “ grew  with  their  growth  and  strength- 
ened with  their  strength.7’  Tuanoa  was  a fine  young 
man,  much  beloved  by  his  neighbours ; he  was  active 
and  brave  in  the  extreme,  and  he  had  performed  many 
acts  of  prowess,  which  gave  him  a standing  place  within 
the  circle  of  the  conquerors  at  a feast,  or  “ houra  houra,” 
and  he  was  withal  of  a most  kind  and  affectionate  dis- 
position, of  which  his  friends  and  neighbours  were  well 
aware.  Kinau,  his  beloved  maiden,  was  the  most  beau- 
tiful girl  in  the  village,  and  of  good  family  and  estate, 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


247 


besides  which  she  was  the  most  esteemed  taipa- maker 
in  the  whole  island ; none  of  her  competitors  could 
approach  her  genius,  which  was  so  frequently  displayed 
in  designing  figures  and  ornaments  to  adorn  her  produc- 
tions, so  that  her  taipas  (native  clothes)  were  preferred 
much  beyond  all  others,  and  they  were  worn  by  the 
king  and  queen.  Her  disposition  was  of  that  rare  and 
delightful  description  which  finds  pleasure  in  searching 
after  the  sorrows  of  others  in  order  to  relieve  them,  and 
blessing  itself  that  it  had  the  power  to  do  so ; with 
such  a person,  disposition,  and  possessions,  we  cannot 
wonder  that  Kinau  was  much  beloved,  and  that  Tuanoa 
was  so  much  envied  by  the  spirited  young  men  of  the 
place ; but  they  enjoyed  no  hope  of  gaining  the  object 
of  their  admiration,  for  she  took  every  opportunity  of 
expressing  to  every  one  her  undying  love  for  Tuanoa, 
and  he  to  her.  But  there  had  been  an  eye  fixed  long 
and  ardently  upon  Kinau,  and  she  was  well  aware  of 
the  fact,  much  to  her  sorrow,  and  many  a burning  tear 
as  it  rolled  o’er  her  beautiful  cheek  awakened  in  Tuanoa’s 
breast  a powerful  feeling  of  regret,  mingled  with  sur- 
prise at  the  unhappy  change  which  had  come  over  the 
mind  of  his  beloved.  How  often  did  he  entreat  in  ten- 
derest  words  for  the  avowal  of  the  cause,  which  never 
was  fully  given : Kinau  knew  full  well,  had  Tuanoa 
been  made  aware  of  the  cause,  that  he  would  have  com- 
mitted some  rash  act  that  would  most  probably  have 
hurled  them  both  to  destruction,  and  therefore  she  left 
the  whole  to  chance,  and  hoped  that  some  day  or  other 
the  dark  cloud  of  anticipated  misfortune  would  be  dis- 


248 


SOUTH  SEA 


pelled  by  some  bright  and  fortunate  rays,  that  would 
pierce  its  blackness,  and  scatter  it  abroad. 

It  was  the  eye  of  the  powerful  chief  Nahi  which  had 
fallen  on  Kinau,  and  he  had  even  sought  a private  inter- 
view with  her,  and  declared  his  passion  ; but  she  reso- 
lutely refused  to  listen  to  his  advances  for  a moment. 
“ What!”  said  the  haughty  erie,  “ do  you  refuse  to  listen 
to  the  voice  of  Nahi  your  chief?  Daughter  of  my  neigh- 
bour, tremble !— let  tears,  as  salt  as  the  waters  of  the 
ocean,  fall  quick  and  fast  from  thy  earth-bound  eye ! 
refuse  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  Nahi,  and  the  volcano  of 
Waikukii  shall  consume  the  blood  of  Tuanoa,  as  the 
shark  of  the  ocean  devours  the  newly-hatched  turtle  !” 
“O  great  Nahi, 59  answered  Kinau,  6 ‘ suffer  your 
neighbour’s  daughter  to  return  the  love  of  Tuanoa, 
whose  love,  like  mine,  burns  as  the  fire  of  the  volcano, 
which  the  waters  of  the  ocean  cannot  quench.” 

a Tremble,”  exclaimed  the  erie,  “ daughter  of  Kua~ 
kini,  and  the  beloved  of  Tuanoa ! go  from  the  presence 
of  Nahi,  and  let  there  be  no  more  said !” 

Kinau  went  from  his  presence  with  trembling  limbs 
and  palpitating  heart ; she  knew  the  disposition  of  Nahi ; 
cruel  and  vindictive  in  the  extreme,  he  spared  nothing 
to  obtain  the  object  of  his  washes.  He  had  committed 
many  crimes  for  which  he  had  often  been  reproved  by 
the  late  king,  and  several  of  the  chiefs.  The  people 
were  also  disgusted  with  his  tyrannical  behaviour ; and 
these  things  combined,  caused  him  to  be  more  careful  of 
his  conduct  than  he  had  been  in  the  earlier  part  of  his 
government.  Kinau  was  also  well  aware  of  the  same, 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


249 


and  she  therefore  trusted  that  he  would  cease  his  impor- 
tunities, but  she  dreaded  his  revenge,  as  she  knew  that 
if  any  opportunity  should  ever  arise  whereby  he  could 
injure  her  or  Tuanoa,  and  escape  the  observation  of  the 
people  from  the  apparent  justice  of  the  act,  he  would 
seize  it  with  avidity,  and  this  was  the  cause  of  her 
dejection. 

The  king,  Hoapili,  had  been  dangerously  ill  for  some 
days,  and  the  active  mind  of  Kinau  saw  the  dreadful 
chasm  which  might  be  opened  to  receive  her  in  the 
event  of  the  king’s  death ; — she  knew  that  Nahi  the 
chief  had  the  power  of  naming  one  of  the  victims  for  the 
sacrifice,  and  the  thought  almost  bereft  her  of  her  senses 
—she  well  knew  that  Tuanoa,  the  brave  and  beloved 
Tuanoa,  would  be  sacrificed  to  his  revenge ; and  under 
these  trying  circumstances,  the  constitution  of  Kinau 
began  evidently  to  decline,  much  to  the  grief  of  her 
lover,  who  perceived  his  lovely  companion,  like  a beau- 
tiful flower,  beset  by  the  night-working  canker-worm, 
which  silently  robbed  it  of  some  of  its  beauties  ; he 
saw  the  devastation  it  committed,  but  he  could  not  dis*> 
cover  its  retreat,— Kinau  still  kept  the  secret  within  her 
own  breast. 

One  evening  as,  to  their  minds,  the  sun  was  once 

more  going  to  rest  in  the  dark  bosom  of  the  ocean, 

the  lovers  reclined  on  the  shelving  and  moss-covered 

rocks,  which  are  near  to  her  house,  in  the  beautiful 

vallev  of  Menoa — as  the  broad-leaved  banana  waved 
* 

around  them,  and  fanned  them  with  the  sweet-scented 
evening  air,  when,  just  as  the  Pele  of  Nuanu  cast  its 

m 2 


250 


SOUTH  SEA 


deep  shadow  across  the  valley  of  their  fathers,  a distant 
cry  of  sorrow  fell  upon  the  ears  of  the  unhappy  pair,— 
to  Kinau’s  mind  the  cause  was  revealed  in  an  instant, 
the  king  is  gone  !”  shrieked  the  unhappy  maid.  “ O 
Tuanoa,  let  us  fly,  let  us  bury  ourselves  in  the  depths 
of  the  ocean,  for  death  is  for  us  also.”  The  extreme 
agitation  of  her  mind  robbed  her  of  her  senses,  and  as 
she  lay,  apparently  without  life,  in  the  arms  of  her 
beloved  and  thunder-stricken  Tuanoa,  a number  of  their 
neighbours  quickly  approached  the  scene,  to  render 
assistance,  and  to  inquire  into  the  cause  of  the  outcry. 
“ Neighbours,”  exclaimed  the  bewildered  Tuanoa,  4<  my 
peace  is  broken,  my  beloved  is  no  longer  herself,  the 
spirit  of  darkness  has  been,  and  has  stolen  the  light  of 
her  soul!”  While  they  were  endeavouring  to  recover 
Kinau,  and  soothe  the  mental  anguish  of  Tuanoa,  a 
band  of  persons  approached,  and  proclaimed  amidst 
loud  wailings,  that  Hoapili  the  Good  had  given  his  last 
breath  to  the  winds,  and  from  out  of  this  frenzied  mass 
of  human  beings  rushed  three  men,  having  their  dress 
disordered  and  hair  dishevelled,  with  blood  gushing 
from  wounds  which  they  had  inflicted  upon  themselves, 
and  approached  Tuanoa.  At  the  moment,  they  produced 
from  under  their  torn  taipas  the  fatal  summons  from 
the  chief  Nahi ; they  were  merely  three  dark-coloured 
poisonous  nuts,  carved  with  a few  figures  to  denote 
their  use,  and  their  appearance  quickly  explained  to 
Tuanoa  and  the  shuddering  crowd  the  purport  of  their 
visit ; they  presented  them  to  Tuanoa  with  particular 
forms,  which  was  enough, — in  an  instant  he  was  bound 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


251 


and  carried  away  by  the  multitude  ; but  his  neighbours 
stood  around  Kinau,  with  their  hearts  ready  to  burst  with 
grief,  and  with  their  minds  filled  with  astonishment  at 
the  choice  of  Nahi,  which  had  fallen  on  the  best  person 
in  the  village  instead  of  the  worst,  which  was  the  usual 
custom— for  there  was  even  a bye-word  among  them, 
which  was  made  use  of  to  persons  of  bad  repute,  “ Ah, 
you  wTill  serve  for  the  fire,  you  will  serve  for  the  fire  !” 
meaning  that  the  person  so  addressed,  would  serve  for 
the  purpose  for  which  Tuanoa  had  been  taken.  When 
the  sounds  of  the  frenzied  multitude  had  passed  awray, 
and  had  left  the  valley  of  Menoa  again  to  its  solemn 
quietude,  and  there  was  only  heard  at  intervals  from  out 
of  the  group  which  still  surrounded  the  bereft  and 
senseless  maid,  the  low  murmur,  or  the  sorrowful  ex- 
clamation for  the  departed  king,  and  the  sorrows  of  the 
divided  lovers ; Kinau  opened  her  discoloured  eyes, 
and  shot  them  around  the  group,  but  saw  not  Tuanoa. 
“ Ah !”  she  exclaimed,  “ half  of  my  soul  has  expired  ; 
friends  and  neighbours,  go- — stay  not  with  Kinau —the 
sun  no  longer  shines  upon  her  tarro-patches,*  the  water 
of  the  mountain  has  also  turned  from  their  roots,  and 
has  fallen  into  the  lands  of  Nahi !” 

Her  kind  neighbours  did  all  they  could  to  comfort 
her  in  her  great  affliction,  and  then  left  her  under 
the  care  of  her  aged  parents.  Nature  soon  overcame 
the  infirm  pair  with  sleep,  and  Kinau  left  her  home, 
never  more  to  return  except  with  her  beloved  Tuanoa. 

* Shallow  ponds  of  water,  in  which  the  tarro  is  cultivated  with 
great  care,  similar  to  those  in  which  rice  is  grown. 


252 


SOUTH  SEA 


She  was  quite  an  altered  being  now  to  what  she 
was  a few  months  before:  her  features  were  shrunk 
and  distorted,  her  hair  torn  and  loose,  her  dark  eyes 
rolling  and  flashing,  betokened  the  storm  within,  her 
heaving  bosom  gave  proof  of  the  agitated  heart ; but 
her  step  was  firm,  and  she  stood  erect,  as  if  with  the 
last  effort  of  a shattered  frame  she  had  determined  to 
devote  all  her  remaining  strength  to  one  great  purpose. 
She  was  convinced  that  there  remained  no  hope  from 
human  means  for  the  restoration  of  her  Tuanoa,  and  she 
therefore  determined  to  visit  the  enchanter  Kelkuewa, 
a thing  seldom  or  indeed  scarcely  ever  attempted  before, 
even  by  the  bravest  of  their  chiefs.  But  Kinau,  feeling 
strong  in  her  virtuous  cause,  feared  not,  and  dared  de- 
struction in  its  wildest  forms.  Kelkuewa,  the  enchanter, 
resided  in  a glen  at  the  bottom  of  the  Pele  of  Nuanu, 
and  near  the  entrance  of  which  the  enchanted  waterfall 
of  two  thousand  feet  in  descent  finished  its  perpendicular 
career,— here  was  the  supposed  habitation  of  a lizard 
as  large  as  a man,  which  the  tradition  of  the  islanders 
holds  out  as  having  resided  there  ever  since  the  time  of 
the  Deluge. 

Kinau  with  firm  determination  commenced  her  task. 
Passing  alone,  away  from  her  friends  and  neighbours, 
over  the  dark  plains  in  the  valley  of  Menoa,  she  soon 
began  to  ascend  the  steep  and  rugged  mountain  of 
Nuanu,  and  after  excessive  exertion  reached  its  summit. 
She  cast  her  wild  eyes  around,  and  saw  the  dark  ocean 
which  encompasses  Oahoo ; she  could  hear  its  distant 
roar,  as  it  broke  with  violence  on  the  weather  side  of 


KINAU  DESCENDING  THE  PELE  OF  NUANU. 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


253 


the  island  ; the  chilly  and  unruly  blast  of  the  night  wind 
almost  forced  her  slender  figure  from  the  pointed  rock 
on  which  she  for  a moment  rested,  her  loose  hair  lashed 
her  burning  forehead  with  its  violence  ; behind  her  was 
the  valley  of  Menoa,  in  which  she  met  the  last  look 
of  her  beloved  Tuanoa,  before  her  was  the  deep  valley 
of  Nuanu,  four  thousand  feet  in  depth,— midway  dash- 
ing its  white  foam,  she  could  just  observe  the  enchanted 
stream  gushing  out  of  a small  division  in  the  rocks, 
and  falling  two  thousand  feet  into  the  valley  of  Nuanu, 
at  the  bottom  of  which  the  enchanter  resided.  Still 
determined  to  visit  him  or  die  in  the  attempt,  she  began 
to  descend  the  perpendicular  and  dangerous  Pele  of 
Nuanu,  and  after  much  difficulty,  now  clinging  to  the 
branches  of  some  friendly  tree,  and  now  sliding  in 
various  positions,  she  succeeded  in  reaching  the  source 
of  the  waterfall ; here  she  rested,  almost  overcome,  a 
torrent  of  tears  relieved  her  overpressed  spirits,  and  she 
commenced  again  the  arduous  task  of  descending  by  the 
side  of  the  foaming  stream,  over  slippery  rocks,  and 
sharp  craggy  points  ; her  feet  all  torn,  her  heart  almost 
broken,  and  her  frame  almost  exhausted,  her  disordered 
vision  distorted  with  tears,  saw  visions  of  darkness  and 
despair  springing  from  every  rock,  the  murmuring  of 
the  trees  as  they  were  moved  by  the  wind  appeared  like 
the  voices  of  her  foes  imploring  for  her  destruction. 
But  still  Kinau  wended  her  way— yes,  the  tender  yet 
powerful  passion  of  love  supported  her,  the  passion  of 
love  in  woman — -invincible  love  ! which  has  caused,  as  a 
great  writer  has  observed,  “ the  change  of  empires,  and 


254 


SOUTH  SEA 


the  loss  of  worlds/5  has  “ inspired  heroism  and  subdued 
avarice,55— she  succeeded  in  reaching  the  glen,  she  bathed 
her  bleeding  feet  for  a moment  in  the  waters  of  the  cas- 
cade ; the  moon,  which  had  before  been  hidden  behind 
dark  clouds,  now  peeped  through  an  opening  in  them, 
as  if  anxious  to  look  upon  the  devoted  girl,  and  admire 
her  fortitude;  the  large  grey  owl,  which  inhabits  the 
valleys,  flapped  his  broad  wings  over  her  head,  as  he 
moused  among  the  rocks,  and  the  quick  flying  bat 
darted  in  and  out  of  its  caves,  as  if  disturbed  by  the 
intruder.  Lifting  up  her  eyes,  Kinau  beheld  a tall  old 
man  descending  the  Pele ; quickly  he  took  advantage  of 
each  jutting  point  of  rock  to  secure  his  footsteps,  and 
he  descended  with  apparent  ease  to  the  spot  where 
Kinau  rested-long  grey  hair  fell  over  his  shoulders  in 
considerable  quantities,  and  he  addressed  himself  to 
Kinau  in  these  words  : “ Daughter  of  Kuakini,  and  the 
beloved  of  Tuanoa,  I am  he  whom  you  seek.  I have 
followed  you  from  the  valley  of  Menoa.  I have  watched 
and  feel  astonished  at  your  strength,  fortitude,  and  love. 
I know  the  spirit  of  darkness  has  flown  from  Menoa 
with  the  gladness  of  your  heart.  Your  love  for  the  brave 
Tuanoa  is  like  the  mountain  of  Nuanu,  fixed  for  ever, 
and  can  never  change  ; it  is  clear  and  bright  as  the 
water  that  falls  from  the  Pele— it  is  like  the  fire  of  the 
volcano  of  Waikukii  which  is  unquenchable  ! daughter 
of  Kuakini  arise,  go  to  the  valley  of  thy  fathers,  and 
rest  in  the  bosom  of  thy  neighbours,  for  I have  seen 
a great  spirit,  who,  before  to-morrow’s  sun  reacheth 
the  valley  of  Nuanu,  shall  come,  and  save  thy  Tuanoa 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


255 


from  the  blood-consuming  fire  !5? — “ O,  great  Kel- 
kuewa,”  said  Kinau,  “ your  words  are  like  water  to  the 
parched  tarro,  they  are  like  the  waters  of  the  ocean  to 
the  expiring  fish  which  the  fisherman  returns  to  its 
element.  I feel  my  heart  lightened,  the  cold  hand  of  the 
spirit  of  darkness  has  moved  from  my  heart ! O,  Kel- 
kuewa,”  continued  the  enraptured  girl,  “ they  say  you 
have  no  daughter,  I will  be  your  daughter,  I will  make 
your  taipas,  I will  water  your  tarro-patches,  though  I 
fetch  the  water  from  the  other  side  of  the  mountain  of 
Nuanu.5*  The  enchanter  seized  the  hand  of  Kinau, 
assisted  her  over  the  Pele,  and  saw  her  descend  to  the 
valley  of  her  fathers. 

The  morn  of  the  day  in  which  the  tragedy  was  to  be 
ended  appeared.  Before  the  sun  had  risen,  thousands  of 
the  islanders  were  moving  towards  the  plains  of  Why- 
teetee,  on  which  the  immolation  of  the  victims  was  to 
take  place.  Lamentations  were  heard  over  the  whole 
island— the  plains  of  Whyteetee  were  soon  covered  with 
countless  multitudes— five  immense  fires  were  lighted. 
As  the  sun  rose,  the  odour  from  the  sandal-wood  which 
they  contained  perfumed  the  whole  of  Oahoo.  In  an 
enclosure  (about  one  hundred  feet  long,  and  fifty  from 
front  to  back,  the  front  wall  of  which  was  about  six  feet 
high,  and  the  back  one  about  twelve,  formed  of  loose 
stones  or  masses  of  lava  piled  upon  each  other,  and 
situated  upon  a rising  ground  at  the  end  of  the  plains 
facing  the  sea)  the  five  victims  were  placed. 

On  a mass  of  rocks  about  one  hundred  feet  high, 
which  rise  abruptly  out  of  the  plains  and  command  a 


256 


SOUTH  SEA 


view  for  a considerable  distance  around,  sat  the  princes 
and  chiefs  with  all  the  great  people  of  the  island  ; among 
them  Nahi  was  observed,  in  a conspicuous  situation, 
watching  the  proceedings  with  great  earnestness  ; for  he 
had  heard  that  Kinau  had  visited  the  enchanted  glen, 
and  he  had  heard  also  of  the  prophecy  of  Kelkuewa— 
indeed  it  was  upon  every  one’s  lips ; and  many  hoped 
that  the  prophecy  would  be  fulfilled,  for  many  of  the 
best-informed  chiefs  and  numbers  of  the  people  began 
to  feel  disgusted  with  these  cruel  exhibitions ; but  the 
custom  was  an  ancient  one ; their  fathers  had  followed 
the  same  ceremonies  with  scrupulous  exactness,  and  it 
therefore  was  the  more  difficult  to  abolish,  as  national 
customs,  whether  good  or  bad,  generally  are;  for  inde- 
pendent of  the  horrible  nature  of  the  practice,  it  was 
liable  to  great  abuse,  as  the  conduct  of  Nahi  fully 
exemplifies. 

The  proceedings  of  the  assembly  soon  commenced. 
The  first  victim,  who  happened  to  be  an  abandoned 
wretch,  was  led  out  of  the  enclosure  by  the  priests,  and 
thrust  among  the  multitude.  There  were  plenty  of  the 
wild  and  infuriated  to  commence  the  attack,  by  hurling 
stones  and  beating  the  unfortunate  beings  with  any 
weapon  which  they  might  have  provided  themselves 
with  for  the  occasion,  and  he  was  hunted  to  and  fro 
like  a wild  beast,  until  the  spark  of  life  was  nearly 
extinct ; then  he  was  hurled  upon  the  funereal  pile,  amid 
the  wild  exclamations  of  the  savage  throng,  while 
66  liquid  fire  curled  around  his  limbs,  and  to  his  hissing 
bones  and  marrow  clung.’ * 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


257 


Kinau,  surrounded  by  her  kindred,  was  seen  in  an 
agitated  state,  frequently  looking  towards  the  Pele  of 
Nuanu,  as  if  she  depended  upon  the  words  of  the 
enchanter,  and  wondering  how  the  great  spirit  would 
interpose  to  save  her  beloved  Tuanoa.  Sometimes  full 
of  hope,  her  countenance  brightened  up  a little,  and 
she  appeared  to  possess  new  life;  then  she  would  doubt 
the  enchanter’s  successful  interference ; and  then  her 
gentle  bosom  was  torn  with  a thousand  conflicting  pas- 
sions—despair,  for  a moment,  shadowed  her  invincible 
spirit  with  his  dark  and  death-hovering  wings,  and  the 
beloved  Kinau  felt  ready  to  sacrifice  her  beautiful  form 
by  any  violent  means.  Tuanoa  observed  his  adored 
girl  with  those  acute  feelings  which  the  pencil  cannot 
paint,  nor  the  pen  justly  describe.  He  was  bound  to  the 
insensate  stake,  which  heard  not  the  heart’s  flutter  or  the 
despairing  sigh — which  felt  not  the  tremulous  shake  of 
the  confined  but  powerful  limb  that  strove  in  vain 
to  break  from  its  moveless  grasp ; at  last,  despairing,  he 
hung  from  his  confinement  apparently  a lifeless  being. 
Another  unfortunate  but  criminal  victim  was  now  given 
to  the  multitude  and  sacrificed  ; and  the  next  was  to  be 
Tuanoa,  the  beloved  and  innocent  Tuanoa,  who  was 
insensible  now  from  the  mental  anguish  he  had  suffered, 
and  moved  not— the  loss  of  his  Kinau  was  more  than 
he  could  bear — while  the  brave  girl  could  no  longer 
endure  with  inaction  the  uncertainty.  She  rushed 
through  the  crowd  of  her  kindred— scaled  the  walls  of 
the  enclosure — glided  between  the  guards  with  a super- 
natural quickness— and  encircled  with  her  devoted  arms 


258 


SOUTH  SEA 


her  beloved  ; but  the  guards  and  the  priests  quickly  pro- 
ceeded to  divide  them  ; and  they  unbound,  and  were 
about  to  thrust  the  bewildered  Tuanoa  among  the  savage 
group,  who  thirsted  for  his  blood.  The  gate  of  the 
enclosure  was  thrown  open— already  the  savage  hand 
was  raised  to  smite  with  deadly  violence — already  the 
maddened  and  frenzied  eyes  of  fanatic  men  were  gleam- 
ing with  murderous  excitement  to  grace  the  royal  death ; 
the  impatient  loyal  crowd,  heap  upon  heap,  bent  to  and 
fro  in  eagerness  to  slay  one  of  themselves. 

But  the  enchanter  at  this  moment  appeared  among  the 
people ; he  pointed  to  an  object  which  appeared  upon 
the. ocean  at  a great  distance;  all  eyes  were  instantly 
directed  towards  it.  During  the  confusion,  a stone  was 
hurled  by  an  unseen  hand,  which  struck  Nahi,  and 
killed  him  in  an  instant,  but  the  event  scarcely  received 
attention.  The  object  to  which  the  enchanter  still 
pointed  approached  the  island  rapidly— it  appeared  larger 
every  moment,  in  a short  time  its  colour  was  distin- 
guishable ; fear  and  curiosity  increased,  for  never  had  the 
people  witnessed  such  a sight  before  ; at  times  it  appeared 
of  an  immense  breadth,  with  wide  spreading  wings,  and 
then  in  a moment  or  two  it  would  appear  quite  narrow 
but  of  great  height ; occasionally  its  apparent  wings 
shook,  then  anon  the  whole  mass  appeared  to  stoop  to 
the  surface  of  the  ocean.  The  princes,  chiefs,  and  the 
people  went  down  to  the  edge  of  the  sea,  the  victims 
surrounded  by  their  kindred  followed,  the  prophecy  was 
fulfilled ; they  were  liberated  by  common  consent. 
>Tever  can  poet  or  painter  describe  or  represent  the  two 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


259 


enraptured  lovers  as  they  appeared  walking  together  on 
the  beach,  having  but  “ one  soul  in  a divided  body.55 

Reader ! the  great  spirit  which  so  rapidly  approached, 
and  was  bringing  to  those  islanders  light  to  disperse 
their  darkness,  humanity  and  religion  to  abolish  their 
cruelties,  the  arts  and  sciences  to  banish  their  ignorance 
—was  the  great  spirit  of  our  immortal  navigator,  Cook, 
who  had  just  discovered  those  fertile  islands,  and  whose 
ship  had  been  observed  by  the  enchanter  on  the  previous 
evening,  from  the  heights  of  the  Pele  of  Nuanu. 


Several  English  and  American  merchants  have  within 
these  last  few  years  taken  up  their  residence  at  Oahoo ; 
for,  being  placed  midway  between  the  north-wrest  coast 
of  America  and  India,  it  offers  many  conveniences  to 
those  who  are  engaged  in  trading  from  those  shores. 

Great  numbers  of  ships  touch  at  those  islands  during 
the  year ; besides  English  and  American,  others  from 
all  parts  of  Europe  and  from  other  parts  of  the  world 
pay  them  visits,  but  from  their  near  proximity  to  the 
Japan  whale  fishery,  the  greater  number  of  them  are 
whalers,  who  resort  to  these  islands  for  the  purposes  of 
refitting  their  ships  and  refreshing  their  crews.  It  was 
at  this  place  that  I first  saw  that  ignis  fatuus  of  the  land, 
which  is  called  by  some,  “ the  water  of  the  desert.55  It 
is  an  optical  illusion,  which  decoys  the  traveller  from 
his  proper  road  to  taste  of  the  imaginary  lake  w'hieh 
appears  in  the  distance,  caused  by  a refraction  of  the 
sun’s  rays  through  a peculiar  atmosphere ; he  may  stride 


260 


SOUTH  SEA 


over  the  arid  plains  with  increased  energy,  to  bathe  his 
parched  tongue  and  lips  in  apparent  water— he  luxuriates 
in  the  thought,  and  when  he  imagines  he  is  approaching 
its  border,  and  is  almost  in  the  act  of  laving  his  burning 
limbs  in  the  cooling  element,  it  vanishes  “like  the 
baseless  fabric  of  a vision,  and  leaves  not  a wreck  be- 
hind,” to  satisfy  his  ardent  desires. 

During  my  stay  among  the  kind-hearted  people  of 
Oahoo,  I was  one  evening  through  the  kindness  of  Dr. 
Hooke  introduced  to  the  Queen-regent ; and  when  I 
entered  her  house,  I found  her  with  the  family  at  supper. 
She  sat  in  the  centre  of  the  floor,  upon  a pile  of  large 
mats,  with  her  husband  and  several  of  her  relations 
about  her ; around  those  also  another  circle  was  formed 
at  a little  distance,  chiefly  by  her  domestics,  most  of 
whom  were  engaged  in  attendance  every  now  and  then 
upon  the  queen  or  her  relations.  When  I entered  with 
my  friend,  she  kindly  desired  me  to  sit  upon  the  mats 
not  far  distant  from  herself,  and  readily,  and  in  the  most 
friendly  manner,  desired  her  domestics  to  wait  upon  me, 
and  offer  me  some  of  the  repast.  I found  them  engaged 
with  good  appetites  upon  their  favourite  “poie,”  which 
is  a kind  of  thick  paste,  made  from  the  farina  of  a 
root  which  is  called  “ tarro,”  and  which  they  cultivate 
with  great  care,  in  artificial  beds  of  water,  called  “ tarro 
patches ; ” they  had  also  various  kinds  of  fish,  some 
salted  and  dried,  and  some  raw  and  alive,  which  they 
devoured  with  great  gusto  ; small  quantities  of  sea- weed, 
of  a most  rank  and  iodinic  taste  and  smell,  were  also 
handed  round,  while  portions  were  picked  out  and  care- 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


261 


fully  masticated  with  great  relish.  The  beche  de  mer, 
or  worm  of  the  sea,  which  is  found  upon  their  sandy 
sea-shores,  and  which  is  almost  as  tough  as  caout- 
chouc, was  bitten  through  by  these  people  with  ease  and 
comfort,  while  one  which  had  been  sent  to  me  escaped 
from  my  impotent  jaws  with  a whole  skin.  Having  at 
my  first  attack  discovered  its  great  love  of  continuity,  I 
would  have  placed  it  aside,  but  observing  a few  of  the 
company  noticing  my  exertions,  I essayed  a second  and 
a third  attempt— “ thrice  I returned  to  the  dreadful 
attack,  and  thrice  by  the  force”  of  its  hide  6(  was  beat 
back,”  when  Dr.  Rooke,  observing  the  confusion  of  my 
defeat,  made  some  observation  which  drew  most  eyes 
another  way,  while  I quietly  relinquished  the  battle 
with  my  tough  adversary.  I then  tried  a little  of  their 
salted  fish,  which  was  far  from  being  unpleasant,  with  a 
taste  of  their  sea-weed,  of  which  I shall  say  nothing, 
finishing  my  dainty  meal  with  a delicious  draught  of 
mountain  water,  the  calabash  which  contained  it  being 
lined  with  the  fresh  leaves  of  the  wild  ginger  plant, 
which  gave  it  an  agreeable  warmth. 

The  next  morning,  at  the  house  of  Captain  Hinckley, 
I had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  with  Madame  Poki,  as 
she  is  now  called  since  her  visit  to  England,  when  she 
accompanied  the  king  and  queen  of  these  islands,  who, 
it  will  be  recollected,  unfortunately  died  while  on  their 
visit.  I also  met  with  “ Old  Thunder,”  as  he  is  termed 
by  the  English  residents  ; he  is  a great  favourite  among 
them,  being  also  a great  chief  of  the  island— the  word 
great  signifying  greatness  of  body  as  well  as  of  position, 


282 


SOUTH  SEA 


—indeed  he  appeared  the  largest  man  I had  ever  seen, 
and,  like  “Parkee/5  another  chief,  but  much  younger 
than  he  was,  as  much  beloved  for  the  goodness  of 
his  disposition  as  the  greatness  of  his  frame,— a great 
proof  of  the  nutritive  qualities  of  their  sour  paste  and 
raw  fish.  I also  enjoyed  the  opportunity  of  waiting 
upon  the  present  young  king,  who  has  been  named 
after  his  father  “ Tameehama/’  I found  his  Majesty 
amusing  himself  in  a truly  English  manner  with  the 
boxing  gloves,  and  I was  informed  that  at  times  he 
also  essayed  fencing  and  other  such  exercises.  He  was 
dressed  in  the  English  mode,  and  his  manners  were 
extremely  free  and  affable,  possessing  a sufficiency  of 
good  sense  to  make  him  aware  of  his  real  situation,  and 
to  cause  him  to  act  in  a manner  becoming  it.  It  was 
stated  of  him  at  the  time  I visited  these  islands  that  he 
was  studious,  and  that  he  had  acquired  considerable 
information,  particularly  in  the  art  of  navigation;  and, 
in  fact,  the  natives  of  Oahoo  altogether  have  made 
great  progress  in  civilization  within  these  last  few  years, 
owing  in  a great  measure  to  the  free  intercourse  which 
they  enjoy  with  the  respectable  white  residents  of  the 
place.  Many  of  the  young  chiefs  write  excellent  hands  ; 
an  alphabet,  and  even  a grammar,  have  been  formed  of 
their  language,  for  which  they  have  to  thank  the  mis- 
sionaries. Subjoined  is  a copy  of  an  apologetic  letter, 
with  its  translation,  from  a young  chief  to  Dr.  Rooke : 

Na  Ruka,  Hido , Oho  31  st,  1830. 

A loha  nui  oe  e kau  ai  kane  aloha  mai  manao  oe  ua 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


263 


liana  ino  aku  au  ia  oe,  e k ou  hoa  launa  ke,  aloha  aku 
hei  no  au  ia  oe,  Pan  ia. 

Eia  keia  nanao  ou  ia  oe  eia  mai  kuu  wahi  komo,  e 
hana  iho  oe  i kuu,  komo  i mea  kala,  ahoi  aku  au  uku 
aku  au  ia  oe. 

Aloha  ino  oe,  e kau  ai  kane  a me  kou  hoa  launa. 

E hai  aku  oe  i kuu  aloha  ia  mi  ka  peka. 

Timothy  Haalilio. 

The  following  is  the  translation  : 

To  Rooke,  Hido , October  31,  1836. 

Great  love  to  you,  my  friend— love  to  you.  Do  not 
you  think  that  I have  wronged  you— O,  my  neighbour, 
I send  love  to  you.  Let  there  be  no  more  said. 

Here  is  this  thought  of  mine  of  you.  I have  sent  you 
my  ring ; get  it  studded  with  silver,  and  when  I return  I 
will  pay  you.  Kind  love  to  you,  my  friend  and  neigh- 
bour, and  convey  my  regards  to  Mr.  Peck. 

Timothy  Haalilio. 

The  Sandwich  islanders  appear  to  possess  a natural 
wish  for  progressing  in  knowledge.  Possessing  a 
delightful  climate,  they  have  every  opportunity  of  be- 
coming a happy,  as  they  have  every  capacity  for  be- 
coming an  intellectual,  race.  The  climate  appears 
to  agree  with  English  constitutions  remarkably  well, 
although  situated  within  the  tropics ; the  north-east 
trade  winds,  which  almost  constantly  blow  here,  cooling 
the  land,  and  making  the  atmosphere  exceedingly  con- 
genial and  pleasant ; and  moreover,  from  the  position 


264 


SOUTH  SEA 


of  these  islands,  in  the  centre  of  the  great  North  Pacific 
Ocean,  the  temperature  of  the  air  is  exceedingly  regular, 
the  variations  in  the  thermometer  not  exceeding  five 
degrees  for  weeks,  and  during  the  whole  year  the  range 
does  not  exceed  twenty-five  degrees. 

In  fact,  Oahoo  is  an  exceedingly  pleasant  place,  and 
it  possesses  everything  necessary  for  an  Englishman’s 
enjoyment,  which  is  well  demonstrated  by  the  appear- 
ance of  those  who  reside  here ; for  they  look  as  jolly  and 
rosy  as  if  they  were  residing  in  their  own  country  with 
all  the  enjoyments  of  life,  so  very  different  to  that  sickly 
hue  which  European  countenances  obtain  in  almost  all 
other  tropical  climates. 

If  the  traveller  should  ever  touch  at  Oahoo,  he  will 
find  the  society  excellent ; he  can  enjoy  himself  at  the 
major’s  table-d’hote  for  a trifling  consideration,  with 
various  delicacies,  among  which  our  favourite  roast  beef 
is  always  to  be  found.  He  may  occupy  several  days,  I 
might  with  propriety  say  weeks,  with  journeying  about 
the  island,  observing  its  natural  peculiarities.  Close 
behind  the  town,  he  may  observe  a large  tree,  which 
resembles  our  walnut,  the  trunk  of  which  is  driven  full 
of  human  teeth— for  it  is,  or  was  the  custom  of  those 
islanders,  on  the  death  of  a king,  queen,  or  great  chief, 
to  knock  some  of  their  front  teeth  out  with  stones, 
which  they  afterwards  thought  proper  to  drive  into  the 
bark  of  the  tree  I have  mentioned.  I saw  several  in  it 
myself,  which  were  nearly  grown  over  by  the  bark,  as  if 
it  was  anxious  to  hide  the  memento  of  so  barbarous  and 
ridiculous  a custom.  But,  above  all,  the  voyager  must 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


265 


not  forget  to  visit  the  Peld  of  Nuanu,  which  I have 
attempted  to  describe  in  “ Kinau  and  Tuanoa.”  The 
magnificent  view  that  appears  to  him  when  on  its 
summit  richly  repays  him  for  the  toil  of  the  ascent : 
he  can  look  down  a perpendicular  precipice  of  four 
thousand  feet,  at  the  bottom  of  which  is  a flat  valley 
appearing  one  mass  of  foliage ; he  can  enjoy  a most 
enchanting  view  of  the  great  ocean,  which  appears  all 
around.  When  on  its  summit,  he  must  not  forget  to 
observe  the  spot  over  which  the  conquerors  used  to 
drive  the  unfortunate  vanquished  in  battle  headlong  into 
the  valley.  He  will  also  observe  some  steps  which  have 
been  cut  in  a bank  at  the  very  peak,  which  is  only 
separated  from  the  precipice  by  a few  feet.  The  natives 
of  the  place  evince  their  courage  and  dexterity  by  rush- 
ing up  this  perpendicular  bank  with  a bound,  while, 
if  the  foot  of  the  adventurer  slips,  or  any  accident 
occurs,  he  is  sure  of  being  hurried  headlong  down 
the  yawning  gulf  which  exists  behind  him ; the  bare 
thought  of  which  caused  me  to  shudder.  Ascending 
the  Peld  from  the  town  we  may  enjoy  a beautiful  view 
of  the  enchanted  waterfall,  which  descends,  Dr.  Hooke 
informed  me,  about  two  thousand  feet.  At  a distance 
it  appears  without  motion,  and  resembles  much  a long 
icicle. 

The  visitor  to  those  distant  regions  must  not  omit  to 
visit  the  plains  of  Owhyteetee,  and  the  altar  of  human 
sacrifice,  which  has  been  described  before— -nor  neglect 
to  call  at  Fleming’s  by  the  way.  Beyond  the  plains 
and  near  the  borders  of  the  sea,  he  may  observe  several 


266 


SOUTH  SEA 


craters  of  extinct  volcanoes,  and  many  other  natural 
curiosities,  which,  to  mention  properly  in  this  sketch, 
would  too  much  extend  this  volume ; and  although  I 
feel  so  tempted  at  this  part,  the  consideration  of  our 
vast  journeyings  yet  to  be  described,  and  the  many 
adventures  yet  to  be  exposed,  command  me  reluctantly 
to  yield,  and  refrain  from  further  mention  of  those 
interesting  scenes. 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


267 


CHAPTER  VI. 

After  a short  visit  to  Atooi,  where  we  procured  a few 
yams  and  several  Muscovy  ducks,  we  bid  adieu  to  the 
Sandwich  Islands,  and  the  beginning  of  June  found 
us  under  all  sail  for  the  “ off-shore  ” Japan  fishery, 
which  embraces  that  part  of  the  Pacific  Ocean  lying 
between  the  longitude  of  140°  to  160°  east,  and  the 
latitude  of  28°  to  32°  north.  Ships  which  visit  this 
fishery  continue  to  cruise  somewhere  within  this  space 
from  the  beginning  of  June  to  the  latter  end  of  Sep- 
tember ; during  this  period,  if  well  conducted,  they  will 
take  from  800  to  1400,  and  even  as  much  as  2000 
barrels  of  sperm  oil.  Nothing  remarkable  occurred  to 
us  during  this  cruise,  except  that  we  were  so  unfortunate 
as  to  lose  one  of  our  apprentices,  who  slipped  overboard 
and  was  drowned  before  our  boat  could  be  lowered  to 
rescue  him  from  his  melancholy  fate ; the  poor  fellow 
was  totally  unable  to  swim,  and  he  therefore  remained 
at  the  surface  but  a very  short  time,  when  he  sank  to 
rise  no  more  ; and  what  made  his  fate  the  more  distress- 
ing to  most  of  us  was,  that  at  the  time  of  the  accident 
we  were  surrounded  with  large  numbers  of  ravenous 
sharks,  who  no  doubt  soon  mangled  his  remains,— they 
had  been  seen  about  the  vessel  for  several  days,  as  if 
anticipating  the  catastrophe. 


268 


SOUTH  SEA 


From  the  beginning  of  June  to  about  the  middle  of 
September  we  fell  in  with  great  numbers  of  large  whales, 
which  we  saw  sometimes  every  day  for  weeks,  so  that 
we  were  kept  in  constant  excitement  with  chasing  and 
capturing  them ; for  the  details  of  which  operations  I 
beg  to  refer  the  reader  to  the  account  contained  in  the 
Chase  and  Capture  of  the  Sperm  Whale,”  in  the  first 
part  of  this  work,  chapters  xii.  and  xiii. 

About  the  middle  of  September  we  found  the  weather 
becoming  tempestuous ; the  whales  also  became  very 
scarce,  or  seldom  seen ; they  appeared  going  off  to  the 
southward,  no  doubt  in  search  of  more  abundant  food ; 
for  now  the  sea,  which  during  the  two  former  months 
had  teemed  with  polypi,  medusse,  flying-fish,  and  squid, 
was  getting  quite  deserted.  They  had,  towards  the  latter 
end  of  September,  nearly  all  disappeared ; and  no  doubt 
the  squid,  upon  which  the  sperm  whale  feeds,  had  taken 
its  departure  also,  for  during  the  two  previous  months 
we  frequently  had  seen  detached  portions  of  them  floating 
on  the  surface,  upon  which  the  whales  had  been  feeding, 
and  which  no  doubt  had  escaped  from  their  jaws ; but 
now  nothing  of  the  kind  could  be  seen,  and  we  there- 
fore prepared  for  our  departure  also,  and,  steering  about 
south-west,  on  the  5th  of  October  1831,  made  the 
Bonins,  which  form  a small  group  of  islands  not  far 
from  the  coast  of  Japan,  in  the  longitude  of  141°  30" 
east,  and  in  the  latitude  of  26°  30'  north.  They  were, 
at  the  time  of  our  visit,  all  uninhabited  except  North 
Island,  upon  which  two  or  three  Europeans  and  a few 
Sandwich  Islanders  were  endeavouring  to  form  a settle- 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


269 


ment.  We  saw  numbers  of  whales  surrounding  those 
islands,  and  we  had  the  good  fortune  to  capture  several ; 
they  were  mostly  females  accompanied  by  their  young 
ones,  although  we  saw  some  large  males  occasionally, 
and  once  in  considerable  numbers;  I then  imagined, 
from  seeing  so  many  together,  and  all  of  them  going 
fast  in  one  direction  towards  the  south-west,  that  they 
were  migrating. 

But  we  had  not  been  long  off  those  islands  before 
we  experienced  one  of  the  most  dreadful  typhoons,  or 
Indian  hurricanes,  that  the  world  ever  produced,  and 
which  astonished  some  of  our  oldest  seamen.  We  had 
had  nothing  but  calms  and  light  airs  of  wind  for  several 
days,  when  our  attention  was  drawn  to  an  increasing 
swell  of  the  sea  which  came  from  the  north-east,  soon 
after  which  the  atmosphere  assumed  a very  sombre  and 
melancholy  appearance,  having  a peculiar  light,  from  the 
sun’s  rays  piercing  remarkable  clouds  of  a dull  ochreous 
red  colour,  which  tinged  the  ship,  the  sea,  and  every- 
thing around.  All  of  us  expected  some  convulsion  of 
nature  was  about  to  ensue,  which  caused  us  to  feel 
both  sad  and  uncomfortable,  and  even  the  sea-caps  that 
broke  upon  the  enormous  waves,  which  had  now  fright- 
fully increased,  seemed  to  us  to  make  a melancholy 
moan.  The  birds  which  before  had  attended  us  in 
considerable  numbers,  now  left  us  to  our  lonely  fate, 
and  had  betaken  themselves  to  some  safe  retreat  at  a 
distance,  or  had  resorted  to  the  hollow  rock,  the  thick 
forest,  or  shady  glen.  Our  captain,  not  behind  in  care 
for  the  safety  of  the  ship,  ordered  all  sail  to  be  taken  in 


270 


SOUTH  SEA 


except  a new  main-topsail  and  a storm-trysail,  which 
we  were  obliged  to  have  bent  to  keep  the  ship  somewhat 
steady  in  the  prodigious  swell  which  still  continued  to 
increase. 

In  the  second  night  after  the  rolling  of  the  waters  had 
commenced,  the  wind  suddenly  sprung  up,  and  increased 
during  the  night  to  a hard  gale,  which  however  died 
away  at  sun-rise,  and  we  again  found  ourselves  without 
wind,  the  ship  being  left  entirely  to  the  mercy  of  the 
waves,  which  caused  her  to  roll  most  frightfully,  her 
chain-plates  striking  the  water  occasionally  with  terrific 
force,  and  the  waves  striking  against  the  stern,  so  that 
the  violent  shocks  thus  caused  at  times  jerked  us  off 
our  seats.  Some  of  our  sailors  thought  the  gale  of  the 
preceding  night  had  finished  the  convulsion  ; but  in  this 
they  were  much  mistaken,  for  about  three  p.m.  the  wind 
again  suddenly  arose?  and  in  about  half  an  hour  blew 
a complete  gale,  which  continued  to  increase  in  violence 
until  about  two  a.  m.  the  following  morning,  when  a 
sudden  howling  blast  of  wind  of  extreme  violence  laid 
the  ship  entirely  on  her  beam  ends,  carrying  the  storm- 
trysail  away,  with  all  our  trifling  movables  from  the 
decks.  The  uproar  which  was  set  up  at  this  time  from 
the  howling  of  the  wind,  the  beating  and  dashing  of  the 
waves,  the  working  of  the  ship,  the  creaking  of  the 
masts  and  clashing  of  the  back-stays,  intermixed  with 
the  hoarse  calling  of  the  sailors,  made  66  night  hideous/5 
and  rendered  the  scene  altogether  indescribable.  That 
was  a dreadful  night  to  me,  and  to  all  on  board ; we 
met  each  other  with  melancholy  looks,  at  the  same  time 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


271 


clinging  to  anything  which  was  within  reach,  to  prevent 
ourselves  from  being  thrown  down.  The  blustering 
bully  of  fine  -weather  now  looked  pale  with  affright ; 
shivering  and  shrunk,  his  mind  had  forsaken  him,  and 
not  a word  escaped  his  lips ; the  dashing  spray,  which 
at  times  flew  over  the  decks,  caused  his  craven  soul  to 
cower  in  pitiable  plight : but  those  who  might  have  been 
thought,  from  their  gentleness  and  civility,  men  want- 
ing nerve  and  courage  were  now  seen  facing  the  danger 
with  unaverted  heads,  quiet— yet  bold,  unassuming — 
yet  proud;  they  feared  not  the  raging  of  the  elements, 
because,  knowing  their  own  hearts,  they  trusted  to 
Him  who  “ rides  in  the  whirlwind  and  governs  the 
storm, ,J 

All  of  us  longed  for  morning,  and  when  it  broke,  an 
awful  sight  presented  itself.  The  typhoon  was  still 
howling  in  all  its  fury,  and  it  was  so  powerful  that  it 
appeared  to  strike  the  ship  like  something  solid,  or 
similar  to  a rush  of  water  ; a lull  for  a few  seconds  would 
ensue,  and  then  heavy  and  sudden  blasts  would  come 
on  in  quick  succession,  striking  the  ship  with  such 
amazing  force  that  made  every  plank  to  shake  in  her 
well-constructed  frame.  The  ship  now  plunging  head- 
long into  an  immense  hollow  amid  the  waves,  and  now 
rising  rapidly  on  the  top  of  one,  while  another  the  next 
moment  threatened  to  overwhelm  us,  and  finish  the  catas- 
trophe,-—all  conspired  to  render  our  situation  an  awful 
one.  At  about  eight  a.  m.,  I accompanied  the  captain 
to  the  top  of  the  companion-ladder,  and  we  both  sus- 
tained ourselves  in  the  erect  position,  although  with  great 


272 


SOUTH  SEA 


difficulty*  by  firmly  holding  the  capstan  with  both  hands 
while  we  were  anxiously  watching  the  ship  wrestling 
with  the  enormous  waves  ; every  time  that  she  plunged 
her  head  into  them  the  masts  bending  to  such  an  extent 
that  we  every  moment  expected  them  to  go  by  the 
board,— the  carpenters  axe  slung  to  windward  ready  to 
cut  them  away  if  necessary.  A prodigious  wave  came 
careering  and  roaring  along  towards  the  weather-bow  of 
our  ship— she  struggled  to  avoid  it,  but  she  pitched 
almost  perpendicularly  headlong  into  a deep  hollow, 
which  came  immediately  before  her,— the  monstrous 
wave  lifted  its  gigantic  head  nearly  as  high  as  the  fore- 
top, and  then  fell  completely  over  her  decks,  even  to 
the  main  hatchway— it  was  a dreadful  moment!  the 
sudden  cries  of  our  brave  mariners  were  heard  above 
the  storm,  as  they  gave  command  or  uttered  their  con- 
cern. The  ship  remained  as  if  she  was  fixed  in  the 
wave  for  a few  seconds,  she  was  unable  to  rise  from  the 
water  which  held  her  under  its  weight,  but  she  recovered 
herself  with  a jerk,  and  the  massive  bowsprit  was  broken 
like  a reed ; she  rose  upon  the  next  wave,  another 
struck  her,  and  threw  the  wreck  of  the  bowsprit  across 
the  forecastle ; there  was  an  immediate  rush  made  for- 
wards by  the  crew,  who  secured  it  with  lashings  ; imme- 
diate attention  was  also  paid  to  the  foremast,  which  was 
now  likely  to  go,  but  it  was  properly  secured  in  time  to 
prevent  that  calamity.  The  ship  now  rode  more  easily, 
not  pitching  so  much,  and  we  endured  the  hurricane  till 
near  sunset  before  it  began  to  decline ; but  by  sunrise 
the  following  morning  the  sea  had  fallen,  the  face  of 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


273 


nature  wore  its  accustomed  brightness,  the  air  was  serene 
and  sweet,  and  the  hurricane  had  passed. 

A few  days  after  we  had  experienced  the  typhoon,  we 
ran  in  under  the  lee  of  South  Island  to  repair  our 
damage,  and  two  boats  were  sent  on  shore  to  obtain 
some  fish,  plenty  of  which  surround  these  islands.  When 
we  got  on  shore  we  saw  the  devastation  the  storm  had 
committed  on  some  parts  of  the  island.  Large  tamana 
trees,  which  are  a kind  of  mahogany,  had  been  blown 
down,  while  the  smaller  trees  were  damaged  in  various 
ways  to  a frightful  extent ; large  masses  of  coral  had 
been  detached  from  the  rocks  by  the  fury  of  the  waves, 
and  were  driven  and  left  high  upon  the  beach. 

Winding  along  the  indented  and  rocky  shore  in  the 

boats,  we  suddenly  came  to  the  mouth  of  a marine  cave 

of  considerable  extent,  and  the  boats  were  headed  in,  to 

explore  the  beauties  of  this  solitary  place,  situated  so 

far  from  the  common  haunts  of  man.  When  we  had 

ventured  within  a short  distance  of  this  ocean  grotto, 

we  were  all  greatly  delighted  at  the  natural  beauties 

which  adorned  it  in  every  part ; we  could  not  form  any 

idea  of  its  extent  inwards,  for  all  was  darkness  in  that 

direction,  although  we  must  have  been  at  one  time  fifty 

yards  within  its  mouth,  and  where  the  sea  still  formed 

its  door.  About  twenty  yards  within  its  entrance  was 

the  spot  which  nature  had  fixed  upon  to  bestow  her 

beauties  with  the  most  liberal  hand.  If  the  eve  as- 

•/ 

cended,  then  its  high  and  vaulted  roof  was  seen,  fretted 
and  time-worn  into  a thousand  fantastic  forms,— the 
long  stalactites  hung  down  midway,  and  pierced  the 

n 2 


274 


SOUTH  SEA 


dingy  light  with  stems  of  various  shape,  with  glistening 
aqueous  points, —while  stretched  beneath  us  a scene  pre- 
sented itself  which  words  cannot  describe  ; the  sea- water 
which  entered  this  cavern  was  of  a beautiful  crystal 
clearness,  as  pellucid  as  the  air,  the  rays  of  a powerful 
sun  penetrated  its  depths,  and  illumined  every  object 
beneath  its  glassy  surface.  The  bottom  of  the  cave  was 
formed  of  many  masses  of  broken  rock,  all  lying  in 
chaotic  confusion,  forming  points  and  clumps,  arches 
and  apertures  of  all  sizes  and  forms,  these  were  tufted, 
lined,  and  embroidered  with  oceanic  ornaments. 

On  a mass  of  red  coral  grew  a feathery  tuft  of  marine 
vegetable,  shooting  delicately  tall  through  the  crystal 
space,  while  others  of  various  forms  enchained  some 
rocky  points,  and  close  beside  the  ocean-fan  expanded. 
Entwined  around  a rocky  column  was  reared  the  tender 
sea-green  stem  of  fucus,  and  at  its  feet  a coarser  kind 
matted  the  uneven  floor ; another  ocean  plant  extended 
its  broad  leaves  across  a rocky  arch,  while  others,  com- 
posed of  hair-like  fibres,  drooped  from  a shelving  rock, 
and  fringed  the  fairy  scene ; and  some  knotted  and 
woven,  in  various  forms  arrayed,  finished  this  Neptune’s 
bower,  growing  from  the  oosy  sand  or  from  the  stony 
clumps.  Around,  corallines  of  various  colours — -red, 
white,  blue,  and  yellow,  constrasted  their  various  shapes 
and  hues,  and  offered  with  tempting  hand  the  rarest 
beauties  from  great  nature’s  store.  Roaming  through 
these  wild  scenes,  hundreds  of  fish  appeared,  of  curious 
forms  and  brilliant  hues.  The  teira,  the  aruanus,  and 
vespertilio,  shewed  their  beauteous  shapes,  while  two 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


275 


of  those  ehetodons  came  close  to  the  boat,  and  stayed  to 
view  us  for  a considerable  time— these  remarkable  fish 
are  of  an  oval  form  and  flat,  of  a rich  silverv  colour 
delicately  striped  downwards  with  azure  bands,  swim- 
ming in  a perpendicular  position,  and  with  two  long  and 
slender  fins,  one  curving  upwards  from  the  back  a con- 
siderable length,  and  another  curving  downwards  from 
the  opposite  side.  These  beautiful  inhabitants  of  the 
ocean  remained  for  some  time  observing  our  boat,  some- 
times gently  reclining  themselves  as  if  to  catch  a more 
extended  view  ; others,  of  curious  forms  and  various 
colours,  were  darting  and  gliding  in  and  out  of  different 
crannies  or  openings  in  the  rocks  in  search  of  prey,  or 
impelled  by  fear,— several  large  cray-fish  moved  their 
antennae  from  under  projecting  points  or  rocky  shelves, 
while  the  beche-de-mer,  star-fish,  and  sea  urchin,  filled 
the  rich  scene,— the  dark  and  wandering  corie  moved 
slowly  along  the  wet  and  slimy  rock,  and  the  prickly 
clam,  with  its  extended  valves  to  catch  its  straying  food, 
remained  fixed  in  the  deepest  cleft,  while  pointed  limpets 
studded  the  rough  walls,  completing  the  objects  in  this 
ocean  cave. 

As  we  were  looking  at  an  object  close  to  an  abyss 
which  appeared  among  the  disjointed  rocks,  of  small 
extent  in  width,  but  from  appearance  of  almost  inter- 
minable depth,  there  arose  suddenly  from  out  of  it, 
gurgling  and  opening  his  enormous  jaws,  with  his  eyes 
glaring  around,  an  immense  shark,— he  was  only  a few 
feet  from  us,  and  although  we  all  shuddered  at  the  sight, 
we  felt  thankful  that  we  were  in  the  boat,  and  safe  from 


276 


SOUTH  SEA 


his  lacerating  teeth . The  formidable  monster  laid  his 
whole  length  close  alongside  of  us,  and  did  not  attempt 
to  stir  until  I endeavoured  to  pierce  him  with  the  point 
of  the  boat-hook,  which  I thrust  at  him  with  all  my 
strength,  and  he  then  only  moved  slowly  away  to  a short 
distance  from  us.  As  we  were  passing  away  from  this 
romantic  spot,  which  I have  vainly  endeavoured  to 
describe,  several  sharks  assailed  the  blades  of  our  oars 
with  great  fury  with  their  teeth,  and  it  was  quite  a com- 
mon occurrence  for  them  to  dart  at  a hooked  fish  at  the 
moment  we  were  hauling  it  on  board  the  boat.  Often- 
times when  I have  been  fishing  off  these  islands,  have 
I observed  them  slowly  moving  towards  my  bait,  and 
when  they  have  just  been  in  the  act  of  seizing  it  I have 
jerked  it  from  them,  and  at  times  have  been  obliged  to 
do  so  frequently  before  I could  get  rid  of  my  trouble- 
some and  disgusting  assailants.  Of  course  if  they  suc- 
ceeded in  getting  the  bait  within  their  merciless  jaws, 
away  went  your  tackle  in  an  instant  with  extreme  force, 
and  such  an  event  when  it  happened  always  filled  me 
with  sensations  of  the  greatest  disgust,  and  even  horror. 

Whalers,  whenever  they  happen  to  be  near  the  shore, 
are  much  in  the  habit  of  visiting  it,  whether  it  be  inha- 
bited or  not,  with  a view  of  obtaining  fish  or  turtle  ; and 
if  it  should  be  inhabited,  they  then  visit  it  to  trade  with 
the  natives,  either  for  food  of  various  kinds,  which  they 
may  possess,  or  for  curiosities,  such  as  shells,  clubs, 
spears,  and  other  things  of  the  like  nature.  They  are 
therefore  frequently  meeting  with  accidents  when  in  their 
boats  pursuing  such  avocations,  either  from  surf  or  sud- 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


277 


den  storms,  which  sometimes  arise  in  a few  minutes, 
allowing  them  no  time  to  get  on  board  the  ship,  or  to 
a place  of  safety  on  the  shore.  I need  not  say,  that 
in  consequence  many,  very  many,  fatal  accidents  have 
occurred  to  boats5  crews  while  engaged  in  such  excur- 
sions, and  as  I was  concerned  in  one  of  a terrible  nature 
myself,  1 have  thought  the  following  description  of  it 
might  prove  interesting  to  the  reader,  and  that  its  in- 
sertion may  not  be  deemed  irrelevant  to  the  plan  and 
object  of  this  sketch. 


A BOAT  ADVENTURE  OFF  THE  BONIN  ISLANDS. 

We  had  been  cruising  after  the  spermaceti  whale  for 
several  months,  and  had  been  very  successful,  yet  we 
found  ourselves  getting  tired  of  the  chase  in  consequence 
of  having  been  without  fresh  provisions  for  several 
weeks,  and  all  of  us  were  longing  for  a fresh  mess,  and 
a little  relief  to  our  minds  in  looking  upon  the  land, — for 
if  we  could  only  gaze  upon  its  verdant  surface,  be  near 
to  it  and  inhale  its  exciting  odours,  we  thought  ourselves 
exceedingly  happy, — for  it  is  a vast  relief  to  look  upon 
one’s  natural  element,  after  having  been  absent  from  it 
several  months,  with  naught  but  sky  and  water  for  our 
constant  view. 

The  captain,  in  consequence  of  our  wants,  now  deter- 
mined to  run  in  under  the  lee  of  South  Island,  which  is 
one  of  an  uninhabited  group,  called  the  Bonins,  that 
lie  a few  degrees  to  the  eastward  of  the  coast  of  Japan. 


278 


SOUTH  SEA 


We  had  a fair  wind,  and  about  three  p.m.  we  were  within 
two  miles  of  the  lee  side  of  that  island  in  smooth 
water.  The  foresail  was  soon  hauled  up,  and  the  main- 
topsail  lying  aback,  when  a boat  was  lowered,  and 
quickly  filled  with  its  crew  and  fishing  apparatus,  for 
the  purpose  of  paying  a visit  to  the  edge  of  the  rocks, 
and  to  procure  as  many  fish  as  possible  before  sunset, 
I,  as  was  usual  on  most  boat  excursions,  accompanied 
them  to  partake  of  the  exciting  sport.  We  got  close  in 
with  the  land  at  about  four  p.m.,  and  ran  inside  a group  of 
rocks,  which  lie  off  South  Island  to  the  westward ; we 
here  in  consequence  lost  sight  of  the  ship ; and  seeing 
numbers  of  fish  in  this  place,  five  or  six  of  us  soon  had 
our  lines  in  readiness  for  the  sport,  having  despatched 
a New  Zealander  through  the  surf  to  catch  some  small 
crabs  which  inhabit  the  rocks,  and  form  excellent  bait 
for  the  fish  which  are  found  in  those  seas.  He  soon 
returned  with  a considerable  quantity;  and  immediately 
the  fish  saw  the  enticing  upper  part  of  a crab’s  leg 
suspended,  they  darted  upon  it  as  if  even  death  was  a 
trifle  when  put  in  competition  with  the  excessive  plea- 
sure they  experienced  in  tasting  the  delicious  morsel ; 
for  although  crabs  are  such  dainty  fare  to  those  finny 
cormorants,  still  they  are  sly  fellows,  and  know  how  to 
make  themselves  scarce.  We  were  soon  in  full  opera- 
tion, taking  fine  large  fish  almost  as  fast  as  we  could 
cause  the  hook  to  descend  deep  enough  ; and  we  were 
only  fishing  in  two  fathoms  and  a half  water,  just  out- 
side  the  surf,  so  that  we  could  perceive  all  our  fish  take 
the  bait. 


WHALING  VOYAGE* 


But  wliat  a delightful  scene  was  here!  We  were 
looking  into  the  beautiful  ocean— it  was  as  clear  as 
crystal ; the  bottom  was  composed  of  masses  of  broken 
rock,  crowned  with  tufts  of  many-coloured  coral,  having 
the  appearance  of  the  ruins  of  empires  covered  with 
time-telling  verdure and,  what  an  immense  multi- 
tude of  fishes  enlivened  the  scene  ! some  darting™ some 
moving  slowly  and  cautiously— some  gamboling  through 
the  briny  waters,  and  appearing  to  do  so  without  an 
effort,— and  now,  to  describe  their  various  beautiful 
colours,  what  a task  is  there  ! Like  the  vegetable  pro- 
ductions of  those  sunny  climes,  there  appears  to  be  no 
termination  to  the  blending  of  the  splendid  colours  of 
the  rainbow  in  producing  so  many  rich  and  exquisite 
tints  ; and  as  it  is  with  the  beautiful  tropical  flowers,  so 
it  is  with  the  living  beings  which  inhabit  the  Indian  seas, 
that  constant  good-giving  luminary  the  sun  no  doubt 
acting  the  same  on  both,  as  regards  the  brilliancy  of 
their  colours.  They  were  of  all  sizes  and  shapes  ; and 
now  and  then  a huge  shark  would  make  his  unwelcome 
appearance,  rising  out  of  some  abyss  or  ocean  cave, 
like  a wolf  from  his  glen,  prowling  in  search  of  innocent 
victims  ; or  like  a vulture  coming  from  its  secret  nest,  in 
the  ruins  of  some  ancient  temple,  to  fatten  upon  the 
innocent  in  the  sunshine  of  their  happiness.  An  invo- 
luntary feeling  of  horror  pervaded  our  frames;  as  the 
lines  now  and  then  touched  these  monsters’  sides,  they 
were  drawn  up  with  a convulsive  twitch,  for  fear  that 
they  should  engulf  the  bait  within  their  merciless  jaws. 
It  is  difficult  to  describe  the  whole  of  this  feeling 


280 


SOUTH  SEA 


or  the  cause  of  it ; but  it  most  probably  arises  from  the 
naturally  uninviting,  disgusting  appearance  of  this  wolf 
of  the  waters,  combined  with  a sudden  reflection  upon 
its  well  known  blood-thirsty,  cruel,  and  utterly  merciless 
character. 

The  sun  was  now  very  near  the  horizon,  and  of  course 
the  light  o£  day  was  subsiding,  when  I reminded  the 
third  mate,  who  had  the  care  of  the  boat,  that  it  was 
time  we  should  be  thinking  of  taking  our  departure,  and 
advised  him  to  weigh  our  boat’s  anchor.  He  accord- 
ingly  gave  orders  for  the  line  to  be  coiled  up,  and  the 
anchor  weighed,  for  we  had  caught  enough  fish  to  serve 
the  whole  ship’s  crew  for  two  or  three  meals ; but  the 
anchor  had  unfortunately  become  fouled,  or  fixed  in  be- 
tween two  large  masses  of  detached  rock,  and  it  was  a 
long  time,  and  with  a great  deal  of  difficulty,  before  we 
succeeded  in  getting  it  clear.  We  did  this  at  last,  but 
not  till  it  was  nearly  dusk;  the  men  immediately  sat 
to  their  oars,  and  did  their  best  to  get  outside  the  land 
in  time  to  get  a sight  of  the  ship  before  dark ; but  what 
was  our  surprise  and  chagrin  when  we  could  not  discover 
her  in  the  direction  we  expected.  The  oars  wrere  fixed 
apeak,  and  we  all  stood  up  in  the  boat  anxiously  looking 
for  our  only  home.  In  a minute  or  two  our  New  Zea- 
lander called  out  in  an  exulting  tone,  that  he  could  see 
the  ship:  it  could  not  escape  his  eagle  eye.  We  all 
looked  in  the  direction  in  which  he  pointed — we  all 
became  convinced  it  was  the  ship.  We  could  make  out 
her  three  masts  like  black  streaks  in  the  gloom,  but  she 
was  in  quite  a different  direction  from  that  in  which  we 


WHALING  VOYAGE* 


281 


left  her-— for  things  had  entirely  altered-— the  face  of 
nature  had  changed— the  wind  had  shifted,  and  blew 
much  stronger ; instead  of  being  now  on  the  lee  side  of 
the  land,  the  wind  was  blowing  along  the  shore.  The 
ship  had  been  driven  to  leeward  in  consequence  of  the 
change  in  the  wind  and  the  strong  current  that  sets  to 
the  westward. 

Not  a moment  was  lost  in  putting  the  boat’s  head  in 
the  direction  of  the  ship,  and  we  kept  that  course  as  well 
as  we  could  by  the  aid  of  a star,  which  now  appeared  in 
the  dark  firmament.  The  boat  was  steered  by  the  mate, 
as  is  usual  on  all  such  occasions,  he  being  considered,  and 
with  propriety,  the  most  proper  person  to  do  so.  It  now 
became  quite  dark,  and  we  had  continued  our  course  for 
some  time,  and  nothing  further  had  been  seen  of  the 
ship — nothing  heard  except  the  breaking  of  the  “ sea-” 
caps*’  and  the  distant  roaring  of  the  surf,  with  now  and 
then  an  ejaculation  from  the  mate  to  the  New  Zealander 
to  “look  out,”  when  in  a moment  three  or  four  of  us 
saw  a light  quite  on  our  beam,  but  at  a very  great 
distance  ; it  appeared  even  with  the  surface  of  the  ocean. 
We  soon  discovered  it  to  be  a blue  light,  which  the  cap- 
tain had  no  doubt  ordered  to  be  burnt  to  apprize  us  of 
the  situation  of  the  ship,  but  from  that  moment  a feeling 
of  hopelessness  ran  through  us  of  reaching  her. 

The  wind  was  freshening  every  moment ; it  was  blow- 
ing a stiff  breeze — the  ship  was  too  far  off  for  us  to  see 
a lantern  suspended  in  her  rigging,  and  we  knew  that 
there  were  only  one  or  two  more  blue  lights  on  board. 
The  sea  began  to  run  higher  and  higher  every  moment ; 


282 


SOUTH  SEA 


and  there  was  every  appearance,  on  looking  around  us, 
of  the  coming  of  a bad  night.  Every  now  and  then  the 
foam  of  the  waves  broke  over  us  in  a merciless  manner, 
and  two  or  three  of  the  crew  were  employed  in  baling 
very  frequently.  Under  these  unfortunate  circumstances 
I proposed  to  get  near  the  land,  in  the  event  of  very  bad 
weather  coming  on,  so  that  we  might  still  possess  a 
slight  chance  of  saving  our  lives,  by  endeavouring  to 
run  the  boat  into  some  creek.  This  was  opposed  by 
the  mate  and  several  of  the  crew  in  a positive  manner. 
They  stated  that  there  could  be  no  hope  of  landing 
even  if  we  could  get  near  the  shore,  for  they  knew  of 
no  inlet  in  this  part  of  the  coast  in  which  a boat  could 
find  shelter  from  the  storm.  X told  them  I had  noticed 
several  places  in  the  surf,  through  which  I thought  a 
boat  might  venture,  but  more  particularly  one  which  X 
had  observed  while  fishing,— although  it  was  a dreadful 
place  even  to  look  upon,  much  more  to  venture  into; 
but  it  was  a forlorn  hope  in  case  the  wind  should  increase 
much  more,  of  which  X had  little  doubt,  and  so  they 
thought  also,  as  X could  observe  in  their  melancholy 
looks. 

All  this  time  the  boat's  head  had  been  kept  in  the 
direction  in  which  the  blue  light  was  observed,  but  now 
the  men  began  to  flag  at  their  oars ; there  was  a general 
murmuring  among  them,— they  were  cold,  wet,  and 
much  fatigued,  and  they  knew  there  was  no  hope  of 
reaching  the  ship.  We  now  saw  in  the  horizon,  but 
faintly,  a glimmering  bluish  light  spring  up  suddenly;  it 
was  in  a direction  from  the  beam  of  our  boat,  at  an 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


283 


immense  distance*  but  we  could  not  distinguish  the 
flaming  body  from  which  the  rays  of  light  proceeded  * 
it  appeared  hidden  in  the  ocean ; —there  appeared  light 
springing  out  of  darkness*  but  in  it  there  was  no  help 
for  us. 

We  all  concluded  that  the  captain  had  fired  another 
blue  light,  which  had  only  the  effect  of  increasing  our 
hopelessness ; for  the  crew  exclaimed,  u She  is  hull 
down,”  meaning  that  the  height  of  the  convexity  of  the 
sea  between  us  and  the  ship  was  greater  than  the  height 
of  the  body  of  the  vessel,  and  consequently  we  could 
not  observe  the  flame  of  the  blue  light  which  was  burnt 
from  her  deck,  but  only  the  rays  of  light  which  diverged 
from  it. 

Our  situation  was  becoming  more  and  more  alarming 
everv  moment;  there  was  at  this  time  a terrible  sea 
running ; astern  appeared  the  gloomy  form  of  the  land 
—above  a dark  and  frowning  firmament,  looking  angry 
and  inclined  to  mischief,— below,  the  vast  ocean,  getting 
up  also  into  a terrible  mood ; like  unto  a giant  snake 
were  its  undulations ; its  sea-caps  performed  its  hissing, 
and  its  wide  jaws  were  formed  of  two  huge  seas  ready 
to  engulf  us. 

We  were  now  obliged  to  keep  the  boat’s  head  to 
windward,  so  that  she  might  be  “ head  to  sea,”  to  pre* 
vent  our  being  swamped,  when,  looking  towards  the 
same  quarter,  we  observed  a small  bright  speck  in  the 
heavens,  which  was  slowly  expanding  into  an  arch.  I 
was  sitting  by  the  side  of  the  mate,— I saw  him  observe 
it  with  dismay ; in  a moment  there  was  a strong  feeling 


284 


SOUTH  SEA 


to  gain  the  shore  manifested  by  the  whole  crew ; they 
would  rather  be  dashed  to  pieces  against  the  rocks  than 
founder  silently  on  the  bosom  of  the  ocean  without  a 
chance  of  escape.  They  understood  the  sign  which  the 
Almighty  in  his  goodness  is  pleased  to  hold  out  to  his 
creatures,  that  they  may  escape  into  some  protective 
glen  or  cave  from  the  violence  He  is  about  to  inflict  on 
nature  for  some  wise  purpose ; — -they  knew  that  in  a 
very  short  time  there  would  be  a convulsion  of  nature, 
“that  there  would  be  an  Indian  hurricane,  which  is 
more  violent  than  any  other  in  the  world,— that  aged 
trees  would  be  torn  out  by  the  roots,— that  the  sea 
would  be  like  an  agitated  cluster  of  mountains,  striking 
against  each  other  with  awful  force  and  impetuosity,— 
raising  clouds  of  mist,  which  would  be  swept  away  with 
almost  the  rapidity  of  lightning. 

The  boat’s  head  was  put  about  three  points  off  the 
wind,  taking  the  sea  upon  her  bow,  and  she  was  headed 
in  as  much  as  possible  for  the  shore.  Enormous  exer- 
tions were  now  made  by  the  men  to  gain  the  rocks, 
trusting  to  Providence  for  a landing-place  ; I was  asked 
by  the  crew  almost  in  one  voice,  if  I could  recollect 
the  spot  where  I had  noticed  the  opening  in  the  surf. 
I replied  I thought  the  boat’s  head  was  directed  towards 
it,— I formed  this  idea  from  the  appearance  of  the  high 
land,  the  figure  of  which  I had  noticed,  its  black  upper 
edge  could  just  be  observed  raised  in  the  clouds  : the 
rowers  increased  their  exertions,  they  cheered,  they  were 
answered  by  the  roaring  surf,  which  we  heard  louder 
and  louder  every  moment,  in  a short  time  we  could 


WHALING  VOYAGE.  285 

observe  its  wild  forms  dancing  in  the  air  to  its  own  wild 
sounds — but  there  was  destruction  to  us  in  it,  death 
was  in  its  foaming  embrace  ! Around  its  base  horrible 
sharks  were  prowling  for  the  unfortunate  victims  of  the 
troubled  waters.  We  could  just  observe  a breach  of 
continuity  in  the  “ rollers/5— it  was  the  passage  I had 
seen  and  had  spoken  of ; we  appeared  to  be  approaching 
it  rapidly,  more  so  than  the  strength  of  our  oars  could 
impel  us  ; there  appeared  to  be  a rapid  current  setting  in 
through  the  opening— the  crisis  approached ! The  men 
simultaneously  ceased  rowing  forward,  and  backed  their 
oars  to  prevent  themselves  and  boat  from  being  whirled 
to  destruction ; the  passage  was  narrow,  in  its  centre 
there  was  no  surf  that  we  could  perceive  in  the  dark- 
ness,—but  on  each  side  there  were  tremendous  pillars  of 
raging  foam.  We  all  remained  in  doubt  what  to  do, 
the  darkness  was  still  extreme,  it  appeared  impossible 
to  pass  through  without  getting  into  contact  with  the 
sides  of  the  channel,  which  looked  like  a marble  sepul- 
chre, opening  its  jaws  to  receive  us.  A few  bright 
flashes  of  lightning,  succeeded  by  terrific  peals  of  thunder, 
and  which  were  followed  by  a howling  blast  of  wind, 
left  us  no  choice  ; the  boat  was  now  drawn  by  the  current 
and  impelled  by  the  furious  wind  and  waves  into  the 
pass.  In  an  instant  we  were  surrounded  by  the  foam- 
ing waters,  far  above  our  heads— they  appeared  about  to 
overwhelm  us— there  was  a death-like  stillness  amongst 
us,  each  grasping  in  an  agony  of  mind  some  part  of 
the  boat.  At  this  moment  a light  was  held  out  by  an 
invisible  hand,  we  could  perceive  our  situation  more 


286 


SOUTH  SEA 


critically,  the  mate  with  one  powerful  stroke  of  the  steer- 
ing oar  saved  us  ! We  escaped  from  the  mighty  power  of 
the  water,  and  were  driven  along  with  great  velocity  into 
a beautiful  smooth  bay,  away  from  the  foaming  billows 
( see  cut) ; the  storm  rolled  over  our  heads  ; we  could  hear 
its  violence  behind  us,  but  we  were  protected  from  its 
rage,  and  heeded  it  not,— everlasting  thanks  to  the 
invisible  hand  of  Him  who  held  thee  out,  pale  Cynthia  ! 
to  Him  who  drew  the  dark  curtain  from  before  thy  bright 
face  in  the  moment  of  need,  when  the  demon  of  darkness 
and  death  was  hovering  over  us. 

We  soon  reached  the  termination  of  the  bay,  and 
landed  upon  a small  sandy  beach  that  was  situated 
between  two  immense  masses  of  broken  rocks,  which 
reared  their  uncouth  forms  high  into  the  air.  At  a small 
distance  from  the  edge  of  the  water  and  at  the  back  of 
the  beach,  an  extensive  forest  of  tamana  trees 'com- 
menced, some  of  them  being  of  gigantic  size,  whose  wide 
spreading  branches  shut  out  the  few  rays  of  light  which 
shot  at  times  from  the  silvery  moon — forming  dark 
arbours  for  the  retreat  of  the  night  bird,  and  where  the 
dying  fox  (with  which  this  island  abounds),  and  the 
night-loving  bat,  might  revel  unreached  by  the  light  of 
day,  whose  unseemly  forms  are  hidden  in  the  shades  of 
evening,  as  if  nature  felt  herself  disgusted  with  the  sight 
cf  beings  so  different  in  form  to  those  inhabitants  of  the 
air  which  rise  with  the  glorious  sun,  whose  beauty  of 
shape  enchant  us,  whose  brilliancy  of  colour  delight  us ; 
but  nature,  all  wise,  animates  with  those  shady  beings 
the  stillness  of  the  evening  for  some  great  purpose  who 


•V 


BONIN  ISLAND— BOAT  PASSING  THROUGH  THE  BREAKERS. 


i 


■A  •' 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


287 


join  with  the  unseen  spirits  of  darkness,  which  are  said 
to  “ walk  the  night  ” while  the  rest  of  nature  lies  in 
profound  repose. 

A fire  now  became  the  first  object  of  our  attention  : 
what  was  our  sorrow  when  we  found  that  we  had  left 
the  ship  without  the  necessary  apparatus  for  obtaining 
one, — but  our  genius  of  good  fortune  had  not  yet  for- 
saken us.  In  the  person  of  the  New  Zealander  we  found 
a fortunate  assistant,  who  by  the  friction  of  rubbing  two 
pieces  of  wood  together  produced  to  our  eager  eyes  a 
flame,  which  soon  ignited  a pile  of  wood  that  we  had 
gathered  for  the  purpose,  and  we  began  to  prepare  a 
repast  from  the  fish  we  had  been  so  fortunate  as  to  cap- 
ture. Our  New  Zealand  friend,  by  a process  peculiar 
to  the  tribe  to  which  he  belonged,  quickly  removed  by 
the  aid  of  his  thumb  nail  the  strong  and  large  scales  of 
a very  fine  fish,  then  thrusting  a long  stick  into  its 
mouth,  he  stood  to  windward  of  the  blazing  fire,  and  by 
turning  the  stick  frequently  round,  soon  cooked  in  a 
masterly  manner  the  unfortunate  inhabitant  of  the  ocean. 
In  twro  old  shells  he  found  upon  the  beach,  in  one  of 
which  he  placed  a portion  of  the  fish,  while  the  other 
contained  a little  salt  water  for  sauce,  did  our  useful 
companion  serve  up  to  myself  and  the  mate  this  humble 
meal.  This  plan  was  quickly  followed  by  our  compa- 
nions, and  in  a short  time  all  but  myself  might  have 
been  seen  in  the  arms  of  Morpheus ; they  were  much 
fatigued  or  they  could  not  have  slept,  for  now  the  storm 
had  increased  to  tenfold  violence.  Standing  alone  upon 
the  beach,  I observed  with  awe  this  convulsion  of  nature, 


288 


SOUTH  SEA 


the  very  ground  trembling  under  my  feet  from  the  for- 
cible beating  of  the  surf— the  wind  groaning  and  howl- 
ing through  the  forest,  and  against  the  rocks,  with 
terrible  strength  ; now  and  then  might  be  heard  the 
cracking  of  some  huge  tree,  which  could  no  longer  with- 
stand the  ruthless  fury  of  the  blast ; and  now  a stream 
of  fire  darting  its  zig-zag  course  with  wonderful  velocity 
buries  itself  in  the  briny  and  troubled  bosom  of  the 
ocean,  lighting  up  all  nature  with  its  lurid  flame,  shew- 
ing the  agitated  waters  hissing  and  foaming  in  the 
distance,  followed  by  horrid  sounds  of  thunder,  terrible 
in  the  extreme,  causing  a sickening  of  the  very  souk 
I felt  desolate,  as  if  the  whole  'world  had  become  a 
chaos,  except  the  spot  ‘on  which  1 stood, —I  and  my 
companions,  like  the  family  of  Noah,  were  the  only 
saved ! with  what  agonized  feelings  did  I think  of  my 
beloved  one,  and  my  dear  kindred could  she  but  have 
cast  a look  across  the  world  of  waters,  and  have  seen 
my  melancholy  standing-place— could  I but  have  seen 
her  beloved  form,  what  joy  would  have  filled  my  heart ! 
—but  we  were  divided  by  the  diameter  of  this  immense 
globe— we  were  antipodes  ; but  although  the  cold  ocean, 
the  snow-clad  mountain,  and  a thousand  dangers  sepa- 
rated us,  still  we  were  as  4 4 one  soul  in  a divided  body;  ” 
there  was  a never-failing  powerful  attraction  between 
us,  superior  to  that  power  which  attracts  the  mariner’s 
compass ; for  although  it  exerts  its  subtile  influence  at 
an  immeasurable  distance,  and  with  undeviating  truth, 
yet  when  closely  approaching  the  supposed  object  of  its 
distant  choice,  vacillates,  acts  with  uncertainty — its 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


289 


secret  influence  is  lost,  when  we  should  have  supposed 
it  would  have  evinced  redoubled  power. 

I at  length  followed  the  example  of  my  companions, 
rolling  a detached  mass  of  coral  from  the  edge  of  the 
sea  to  the  side  of  the  fire,  on  which  to  rest  my  head,  I 
reclined  upon  the  sand,  and  notwithstanding  the  roar  of 
the  elements  soon  fell  asleep,  but  during  which  dreams 
of  a disagreeable  nature  continually  harassed  me,  and  I 
was  in  a short  time  entirely  aroused  by  the  voices  of 
several  persons  near  me,  which  I soon  discovered  to  be 
my  fellow  adventurers,  who  had  risen  from  their  uncom- 
fortable resting-places,  and  were  discussing  the  incidents 
of  this  adventure.  The  fate  of  the  ship  of  course  now 
formed  the  principal  topic  of  their  conversation ; one 
supposed  she  had  been  driven  a long  way  from  the 
island,  while  another  stated  that  the  typhoon  had  blown 
gradually  round  the  compass,  and  therefore  she  could 
not  at  present  be  at  any  very  great  distance;  still  a 
heart-rending  and  melancholy  foreboding  hung  upon  us 
all,  that  she  was  lost ! The  last  time  we  saw  her  she 
was  drifting  in  the  direction  of  North  Island  ; we  knew 
that  great  numbers  of  detached  and  sunken  rocks  lie 
about  there,  which  cause  the  navigation  to  be  extremely 
dangerous,  and  more  particularly  in  a hurricane,  when 
nearly  all  command  of  the  ship  is  lost. 

The  eastern  part  of  the  heavens  now  became  slowly 
illuminated,  betokening  the  coming  day,  the  cheering 
sight  of  which  lessened  our  melancholy  and  increased 
our  hope.  The  violence  of  the  storm  had  somewhat 
abated;  the  glorious  sun  wras  rising  to  light  the  mariner 


o 


290 


SOUTH  SEA 


on  his  dangerous  path,  to  dispel  the  darkness  which 
adds  much  to  his  discomfiture,  and  to  cheer  him  from 
his  gloomy  imaginativeness  of  being  near  dangers  which 
he  cannot  perceive.  The  sun  rose,  appearing  to  spring 
out  of  the  ocean,  of  a crimson  hue ; wild  and  tattered 
seemed  the  clouds  which  hung  around  him,  gilded  from 
his  effulgence : he  looked  like  a stern  warrior  rising 
from  the  fight,  with  his  mantle  tom  and  bloody,  his 
enemies  lying  prostrate  and  conquered,  and  encom- 
passed with  the  darkness  of  night.  Surrounded  with 
glory,  he  rose  from  out  the  dark  roar  of  the  elements 
with  heaven-born  majesty,  securing  by  his  presence  har- 
monious peace,  and  giving  to  oblivion  the  horrors  of  the 
past  night. 

The  cheering  light  of  day  being  once  more  fully  esta- 
blished, myself  and  the  mate  commenced  to  climb  up 
one  of  the  rocky  eminences  wdiich  overlooked  the  sea, 
for  the  purpose  of  gaining,  if  possible,  a view  of  the 
ship.  After  some  labour,  danger,  and  difficulty,  we  suc- 
ceeded in  gaining  the  uppermost  pinnacle  of  the  rocks, 
and  casting  our  eyes  around,  beheld  one  of  the  finest 
scenes  in  nature.  Below,  the  fluid  element,  uneven  and 
broken,  but  losing  rapidly  the  quickness  of  its  motion— 
the  giant  waves  slowly  and  lazily  tumbling  against  each 
other,  on  account  of  the  lessening  of  the  wind,  but  the 
surf  still  rolling  in  enormous  masses  over  the  rocks, 
darting  its  snow-white  foam  in  some  places  to  a consi- 
derable height.  In  an  opposite  direction  stood  the 
tamana  forest,  imitating  in  its  waving  motion  a gently 
troubled  sea.  But  while  wre  were  both  silent,  and  ob- 
serving the  different  natural  objects  which  quickly  pre- 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


291 


sented  themselves  to  our  notice,  with  inexpressible  joy 
we  perceived  the  ship  coming  from  behind  some  high 
land  which  stood  upon  our  right,  and  she  was  soon  fully 
in  our  view.  A shout  of  exultation  rent  the  air  as  we 
motioned  to  some  of  our  companions  who  remained 
upon  the  beach,  that  the  ship  could  be  seen,  and  was 
near.  They  answered  us  with  cheers,  and  rushing  up 
the  craggy  rocks  with  dangerous  velocity  to  the  spot  on 
which  we  stood,  they  feasted  their  eyes  upon  the  object 
of  our  late  solicitude  with  heartfelt  satisfaction-some 
having  deemed  her  lost,  and  others  that  she  would  not 
have  made  the  island  for  several  days.  But  our  poor 
ship  looked  quite  weather-beaten  and  dejected;  her 
three  top-gallant  masts  were  struck ; she  was  lying  with 
only  a close-reefed  maintopsail  to  the  wind,  and  as  she 
lay  tumbling  and  rolling,  now  on  the  top  of  an  enormous 
wave,  and  now  between  two  of  them,  appearing  to  be 
half  engulphed,  and  ever  and  anon  the  sea  washing  over 
her  decks,  gave  us  a plain  representation  of  the  toilings 
and  sufferings  of  the  tars  who  had  remained  on  board. 

The  wind  and  waves  continued  to  abate,  and  we  em- 
ployed ourselves  in  carrying  the  boat  over  a small  neck 
of  land,  which  divided  the  bay  from  another,  and  into 
which  the  ship  appeared  to  be  drifting.  That  glorious 
sun  which  gave  us  hope  in  the  morning  was  now  falling 
rapidly  again  into  the  abyss  of  night,  but  left  us  his 
evening  rays  to  light  us  on  our  journey  to  the  ship; 
and  while  we  were  climbing  her  side,  amidst  the  con- 
gratulations of  our  companions,  the  magnificent  orb  was 
once  more  lost  behind  the  dark  and  swelling  bosom  of 
the  ocean. 


292 


SOUTH  SEA 


CHAPTER  Vila 


On  the  10th  December,  1831,  we  set  sail  from  theBonins, 
steering  through  groups  of  wild  and  romantic  islands  for 
the  burning  regions  of  Papua  or  New  Guinea,  to  prose- 
cute  the  fishery  there ; and  we  now  found  it  was  high 
time  to  take  our  departure,  for  not  only  did  the  wind 
shew  its  turbulence,  but  torrents  of  rain  frequently  fell, 
which  were  often  preceded  by  heavy  fogs,  we  therefore 
at  the  time  I have  mentioned  crowded  all  sail,  and 
were  soon  rid  of  those  unwelcome  combinations,  find- 
ing ourselves  in  a fewr  days  in  very  pleasant  weather. 
We  had  a long  passage  to  make  and  no  time  to  spare, 
and  therefore  we  made  no  stoppages  before  arriving  at 
our  place  of  destination,  passing  in  our  course  to  wind- 
ward of  the  Ladrone  Islands,  and  falling  in  with  the 
Carolines  on  the  24th  of  December ; a range  of  large 
islands  scarcely  known,  and  not  even  placed  correctly 
on  the  charts  ; those  which  we  fell  in  with  were  situated 
in  the  longitude  of  153°  25"  east,  and  in  the  latitude  of 
7°  25 " north.  At  these  islands  we  traded  with  the 
natives  for  a few  hours,  who  came  off  in  their  excellent 
canoes  in  great  numbers,  and  beset  the  ship  on  all  sides, 
although  they  were  extremely  cautious  in  approaching 
us  at  first.  They  are  a very  fine  race  of  people,  of  a 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


293 


light  olive  colour,  and  possessing  pleasant  features. 
They  have  a curious  method  of  forming  a ring  of  flesh 
from  the  lower  part  of  their  ears,  through  which  in  one 
individual,  I could  thrust  one  of  my  hands  ; in  this  they 
place  a banana  leaf,  rolled  up  to  the  size  necessary  to  fill 
it;  it  is  sometimes  also  ornamented  with  a flower. 

These  islands  are  seldom  visited  by  Europeans,  and  I 
am  afraid  that  the  natives  are  not  of  a very  friendly  dis- 
position ; for  I saw  many  of  their  acts,  although  we  only 
traded  with  them  for  a short  time,  which  convinced  me 
that  they  “ were  sudden  and  quick  in  quarrel and  since 
our  visit  I am  sorry  to  have  to  record  that  those  very 
people  have  massacred  nearly  the  whole  of  the  crew  of  a 
South-seaman,  called  the  “ Falcon,”  although  I am  unable 
to  state  what  circumstances  led  to  that  catastrophe ; still, 
as  I have  before  stated,  my  opinion  is  that  a very  trifling 
cause  would  be  sufficient,  especially  with  their  advantage 
of  overwhelming  numbers.  We  obtained  from  these 
people  a few  shells,  some  of  their  dresses,  and  other 
curiosities,  for  pieces  of  old  iron  hoop,  which  they  were 
very  anxious  to  obtain.  While  we  were  trading  with 
them,  a very  heavy  squall  arose,  which  being  fair  for  us, 
we  ran  directly  before  it,  and  soon  lost  sight  of  those 
wild  beings,  leaving  them  in  the  greatest  confusion.  In 
consequence  of  the  squall  several  of  the  natives  who 
were  on  board,  finding  that  we  were  leaving  their  little 
craft,  jumped  overboard  and  regained  them  in  that  way, 
and  we  soon  perceived  the  crowd  of  canoes,  which  were 
close  together  when  the  wind  came,  running  in  all  direc- 
tions against  each  other,  all  evidently  in  great  confusion 


SOUTH  SEA 


k294 

from  the  violence  of  the  storm,  which  however  did  not 
continue  long* 

Near  sunset,  the  same  evening,  we  saw  a large  reef 
extending  across  our  intended  course,  and  as  the  captain 
had  made  up  his  mind  to  run  all  night,  it  was  a most 
providential  occurrence  for  us  that  we  came  up  with  it 
before  sunset,  for  half  an  hour  later  would  inevita- 
bly  have  brought  the  ship  upon  it,  as  the  nights  at 
this  time  were  extremely  dark,  and  the  reef  was  so  low 
that  the  sea  washed  completely  over  it  in  every  part ; so 
that  we  should  have  had  very  little  chance  of  seeing  it, 
and  much  blame  could  not  have  been  attributed  to  any 
one,  as  it  was  not  even  marked  on  the  charts.  On  find- 
ing ourselves  in  such  a perilous  situation,  we  soon 
hauled  our  wind,  and  remained  all  night  with  our  head- 
yards  aback  waiting  for  the  morning  ; when  the  dangers 
we  had  escaped  were  rendered  more  manifest,  and  we 
found  the  reef  of  much  greater  extent  than  we  had 
anticipated  on  the  previous  evening,— and  we  could  also 
perceive  some  very  high  land  at  a distance  in  an  easterly 
direction  from  us.  This  was  the  second  escape  of  the 
kind  we  had  experienced  during  the  voyage,  for  we  very 
nearly  ran  ashore  on  the  coast  of  Chili,  during  a thick 
fog,  and  so  near  were  we  to  the  rocks  at  that  time,  that 
we  should  have  been  wrecked  had  the  ship  but  once 
have  “missed  stays”  when  she  was  “put  about”  to 
avoid  the  danger.  We  now  became  exceedingly  cau- 
tious, keeping  an  excellent  “look-out”  when  we  sailed 
during  the  night,  which  became  the  more  necessary  as 
we  were  now  navigating  in  very  dangerous  seas. 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


295 


On  the  1st  of  January  1832,  we  crossed  the  equinoc- 
tial  line  for  the  third  time  since  we  left  England — a few 
days  after  which,  we  fell  in  with  some  small  islands, 
which  are  called  “ Fead’s  Group we  had  also  a distant 
view  of  St.  John’s  Island,  as  it  is  called,  of  which  I shall 
make  particular  mention  farther  on.  We  found  our 
longitude  this  day  155°  35'  14/'  east,  and  our  latitude 
3°  41  south.  Fead’s  Group,  which  we  saw  at  day- 
break,  were  covered  with  verdure  to  the  water’s  edge,  of 
a most  luxuriant  kind,  and  as  we  passed  along  the 
shores  we  observed  several  of  the  natives,  who  uttered 
loud  shouts,  and  seemed  desirous  that  we  should  land ; 
but  we  did  not  stay  to  communicate  with  any  of  them, 
until  we  arrived  at  New  Ireland,  which  we  made  on 
the  6th  of  January,  having  passed  St.  John’s  and  the 
“ Oraison”  Islands  on  the  5th,  and  on  the  7th  we  found 
ourselves  in  the  north-eastern  part  of  St.  George’s  Chan- 
nel, which  separates  New  Ireland  from  New  Britain. 
We  found  the  weather  at  this  time  excessively  hot,  so 
that  blisters  arose  upon  any  part  of  the  skin  on  which 
the  sun’s  rays  happened  to  fall.  The  land  on  each  side 
of  the  channel  is  high  and  bold,  being  also  covered  with 
verdure  to  the  water’s  edge.  The  sea  continues  deep 
close  up  to  the  land,  so  that  a ship  can  approach  very 
near  to  it  in  most  places.  Every  evening  we  saw  a 
great  deal  of  lightning  playing  about  the  tops  of  the 
hills,  which  rise  to  a considerable  elevation. 

We  continued  to  sail  up  mid-channel  for  several  days 
•,vith  very  light  airs  of  wind,  but  we  did  not  see  any 
inhabitants,  although  we  could  perceive  smoke  issuing 


296 


SOUTH  SEA 


from  the  woods  in  several  places,  so  that  we  supposed 
that  they  either  did  not  see  us  or  that  they  were  not 
willing  to  shew  themselves. 

On  the  fifth  morning  after  we  had  first  entered  the 
channel  the  third  mate  informed  the  captain,  that  he  had 
on  a former  voyage  traded  with  some  natives  at  a place 
much  higher  up  the  channel  than  w’e  then  were,  and  had 
procured  from  them  some  pigs,  fowls,  and  a kind  of 
potato,  so  that  the  captain  was  induced  to  send  off  two 
boats  in  search  of  them,  it  not  being  likely  we  could 
reach  the  place  of  their  residence  with  the  ship,  on 
account  of  the  lightness  of  the  wind.  The  captain  at 
starting  gave  us  strong  injunctions  that,  in  case  we 
found  the  natives,  not  to  engage  in  barter  with  them 
if  we  found  them  in  the  slightest  degree  troublesome  or 
quarrelsome.  We  started  at  about  eight  a.m.,  rowing 
along  the  shore  of  New  Ireland,  leaving  the  ship  very 
nearly  becalmed.  As  we  passed  along  the  coast  in  our 
boats  we  had  an  excellent  opportunity  of  witnessing  the 
beauties  of  this  distant  region,  which  I would  fain 
attempt  to  describe,  but  for  brevity’s  sake  must  refrain. 

We  saw  numbers  of  curious  fish  lying  on  the  surface  of 
the  water,  the  most  common  of  which  was  a small  kind 
of  saw-fish,  which  rested  near  the  surface,  with  the  saw 
or  horny  instrument  at  the  end  of  the  nose  projecting  ou^ 
of  the  water  ; we  saw  great  numbers  of  these,  apparently 
basking  in  the  sun,  but  the  moment  the  noise  of  the 
boat  was  discovered,  they  darted  away  with  extreme 
velocity.  We  also  saw  a number  of  beautiful  birds, 
flying  to  and  fro  among  the  large  trees  which  ‘grew 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


297 


along  the  shore ; they  appeared  of  the  parrot  kind,  such 
as  lories,  large  parrots,  and  cockatoos.  The  land  was 
in  some  places  covered  with  a thick  underwood,  out  of 
which  projected  the  tall  bamboo  or  the  wide-spreading 
tarn  an  a. 

After  we  had  continued  our  course  upwards  of  four 
hours,  not  only  along  the  coast  but  past  several  creeks 
and  wide  inlets  and  between  small  islands  which  stood 
off  the  main  one  of  New  Ireland,  our  mate  appeared  all 
at  once  to  have  lost  the  thread  of  his  journey,  for  lie 
declared  that  he  could  not  recollect  any  of  the  objects 
which  now  met  his  view.  This  announcement  some- 
what damped  the  men’s  ardour  who  were  rowing,  and 
not  having  seen  any  natives  as  yet,  and  having  passed 
about  fourteen  or  fifteen  miles  up  the  channel,  we  all 
determined  to  land,  which  we  in  a short  time  did  in 
several  places.  On  the  fifth  time  of  our  landing  we 
discovered  an  old  canoe  lying  on  the  shore,  which  had 
the  appearance  of  having  lain  there  for  some  time.  At 
this  place,  having  walked  a small  distance  into  the 
woods,  we  all  shouted  together  at  the  top  of  our  voices ; 
but  not  a soul  appeared,  although,  as  we  were  all 
standing  together  under  some  stately  trees,  we  expected 
every  moment  to  see  a savage  thrust  his  dark  form  from 
the  bush  or  jungle  which  surrounded  us,  and  the  sensa- 
tions which  arose  from  those  ideas  were  not  of  the  most 
pleasant  kind,  at  least  to  me.  We  all  shouted  again 
and  again,  making  the  forest  resound,  but  the  reverbera- 
tion soon  lost  itself  in  those  deserted  wilds  ; but  no 
living  creature  presented  itself  to  wonder  at  our  ap- 

o 2 


298 


SOUTH  SEA 


proach.  We  essayed  the  same  performance  at  another 
place  about  a mile  distant,  and  although  we  saw  some 
dilapidated  huts,  nothing,  except  a few  birds,  started 
at  our  appearance*  The  country  seemed  untimely 
bereft  of  its  inhabitants,  as  it  were  by  plague  or  by 
famine : here  were  the  remains  of  the  handicraft  of  the 
savage,  but  the  agent  had  vanished,  leaving  the  marks 
of  his  rude  ingenuity*  There  was  a silence  too,  and 
solemnity  here  which  naturally  inspired  us  all  with  the 
reflection,  that  a handful  of  men,  thousands  of  miles 
from,  their  own  country,  had  ventured  into  this  almost 
unknown  region,  and  boldly  sought,  without  arms  or 
protection,  the  habitation  of  the  savage,  and  actually 
endeavoured  to  surprise  him  in  his  haunts,  by  pro- 
bably  unwelcome  and  intrusive  sounds.  But,  after 
having  visited  various  places,  we  did  not  meet  with 
any  during  the  wdiole  day,  and  I have  often  thought 
since  that  it  was  a most  fortunate  circumstance  that 
we  did  not,  for  who  could  have  calculated  safely  on 
their  conduct  to  us  when  they  found  that  we  were  but 
few  in  number,  without  even  the  sight  of  the  ship  for  a 
protection,  which  was  so  far  off  that  her  masts  could  not 
be  seen?  But  this  only  forms  another  instance  of  the 
adventurous  spirit  of  whale  fishermen,  who  know  no 
fear  among  the  remote  parts  of  the  world,  which  they 
visit  in  their  hardy  industry.  But,  alas!  how  many 
brave  men  have  at  various  times  fallen  a sacrifice  to 
this  kind  of  daring.  Finding  our  search  fruitless,  we 
resolved  upon  returning  to  the  ship,  and  we  began  rating 
and  gibing  the  mate  on  the  unsuccessful  chase  he  had 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


299 


led  us  ; and  many  of  us,  from  various  circumstances, 
doubted  his  information  altogether;  and  as  we  were 
rowing  along  the  borders  of  the  surf,  which  was  rolling 
on  the  shore,— -now  indulging  in  the  loud  laugh,  and 
now  listening  to  the  vehement  assertions  of  the  mate  in 
vindication  of  his  conduct, — we  were  suddenly  impelled 
into  the  surf,  which  we  were  rowing  too  near.  In  a 
moment  we  found  ourselves  on  the  top  of  its  foaming 
crest;  and,  as  we  were  “broadside  on,”  we  escaped 
being  dashed  to  pieces  in  a most  miraculous  manner  by 
a fortunate  twirl  of  the  boat  and  the  excessive  exertions 
of  the  rowers,  who  were  strong  enough  to  force  the  boat 
against  the  next  roller  as  it  came  running  upon  us, — -but 
we  suffered  nothing  except  a good  ducking  from  the 
spray,  which  flew  over  and  half- filled  one  of  the  boats. 
This  affair  sobered  our  merriment  for  some  time  ; and 
such  is  the  elasticity  of  good-humour  which  pervades 
sailors,  that  they  appeared  to  have  forgotten  the  event 
altogether  long  before  we  arrived  near  the  ship. 

But  we  had  not  yet  surmounted  all  the  dangers  and 
disagreeables  fated  to  pertain  to  this  trip,  for  after  we 
had  “ made  out  ” the  ship  for  some  time  in  the  distance, 
and  had  approached  within  four  miles  of  her,  the  sun 
began  to  dip  into  the  horizon,  and  darkness  came  on 
with  great  rapidity,  and  above  all,  a storm  suddenly 
arose,  accompanied  with  vivid  lightning,  and  torrents  of 
rain  fell  in  such  quantities  as  to  render  a view  of  any 
object  a quarter  of  a mile  off  impossible.  The  wind 
blew  with  such  violence,  that  had  it  not  been  most  for- 
tunately fair  for  us  we  must  have  run  before  it  in  our 


300 


SOUTH  SEA 


boats  until  we  could  have  found  shelter  under  the  land, 
or  in  some  creek  or  inlet,  which  in  the  darkness  of  the 
night  would  have  been  extremely  difficult  to  find ; but 
as  it  was,  we  scudded  before  it  with  great  velocity, 
with  only  a small  portion  of  our  sails  exposed  to  its 
violence,  our  only  fear  being  now,  on  account  of  the 
rain  and  darkness,  that  we  should  overshoot  our  mark, 
and  pass  the  ship,  and  so  enjoy  a night's  sojourn  in 
the  boats,  exposed  to  the  horrid  war  of  the  elements, 
which  now  raged  with  great  fury.  We  still  continued 
to  steer  in  the  direction  we  had  last  seen  the  ship,  and 
some  of  us  began  to  think  that  we  had  already  passed 
her,  having  by  this  time  been  running  before  the  wind 
for  about  twenty  minutes,  but  shortly  afterwards  we  had 
the  satisfaction  of  seeing  the  ship  right  ahead  of  us,  and 
lying  to  ; we  speedily  ran  our  boats  round  to  the  lee 
side  of  her,  and  I was  the  first  to  clutch  her  chains  and 
climb  on  board,  amid  such  a torrent  of  rain,  such  vivid 
lightning  and  loud  thunder,  with  violent  wind  and  roar- 
ing of  the  waters,  that  we  thought  the  elements  were 
combining  together  to  destroy  us. 

Such  are  the  particulars  of  another  of  our  escapes,  in 
which  the  reader  will  probably  observe,  that  we  were 
more  fortunate  than  wise.  The  storm  raged  with  great 
violence  for  about  two  hours,  when  the  weather  became 
suddenly  calm,  and  the  next  morning  was  as  serene  as 
the  preceding  one,  when  we  had  commenced  our  journey 
in  the  boats. 

As  a ,proof  of  the  intense  heat  of  the  sun  at  this  place, 
one  of  our  men  foolishly  rolled  up  the  lower  part  of  his 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


301 


trousers,  thinking  that  he  could  row  more  comfortably ; 
his  legs  were  in  consequence  exposed  to  the  direct  in- 
fluence of  the  sun,  which  actually  burnt  them  so  much 
that  they  appeared  just  as  if  scalding  water  had  been 
thrown  over  them,  and  such  was  their  state  that  they 
were  nearly  a fortnight  in  getting  well. 

The  morning  after  our  escape  in  the  boats  we  found 
that  the  ship  had  drifted  during  the  night,  and  had 
approached  the  opposite  shore  of  New  Britain,  having 
been  much  nearer  to  the  shore  of  New  Ireland  on  the 
preceding  day  ; and  a very  different  scene  presented  itself 
in  consequence.  That  part  of  the  coast  which  we  were 
nearest  to,  actually  thronged  with  natives,  who  appeared 
busily  employed  in  various  ways, — some  were  launching 
canoes,  others  ranging  the  beach  in  different  directions, 
the  woods  and  rocks  resounded  with  their  cries,  the 
shingly  shore  swarmed  with  men,  women,  and  children. 
The  dull  monotony  of  the  scene  which  we  had  viewed 
for  five  successive  days  now  became  animated  with 
vivacious  beings, — the  solemnity  and  silence  which  had 
prevailed  so  long  were  now  broken  by  the  events  which 
every  moment  occurred,  and  the  quick  and  sharp  cries 
which  were  now  heard  from  the  shore. 

A number  of  canoes  filled  with  the  sable  inhabitants 
of  these  burning  regions  were  seen  to  put  off,  but  when 
they  came  within  a hundred  yards  of  the  ship  they  all 
ceased  paddling,  and  nothing  could  induce  them  to 
approach  nearer  to  us  ; the  captain  then  ordered  two 
boats  to  be  manned  and  sent  to  them.  When  we  began 
to  get  close  to  them,  the  various  emotions  which  sprang 


302 


SOUTH  SEA 


up  in  their  bosoms  were  indicated  by  the  expressions  of 
their  dark  countenances,  and  the  motions  of  their  limbs ; 
they  did  not  attempt  to  move  their  canoes,  but  they 
scarcely  knew  how  to  proceed,— some  appeared  ready 
to  leap  overboard,  while  others,  bolder  than  the  rest, 
beckoned  us  to  approach  with  winning  and  disarming 
smiles,  and  some  were  evidently  much  excited  both  by 
fear  and  curiosity . We  happened  to  open  our  proceed- 
ing in  a manner#which  quickly  convinced  them  that  our 
visit  to  their  dominions  was  a friendly  one.  I wore  at 
the  time  a small  white  calico  riding-cap,  and  when  we 
got  close  to  one  of  their  canoes  I reached  across,  and 
placed  it  on  the  head  of  one  of  the  men  who  appeared 
to  be  a chief;— the  effect  was  instantaneous;  a yell  of 
satisfaction  from  the  assembled  multitude  arose  which  I 
shall  never  totally  forget,  then  such  a chattering  and 
gibbering  broke  from  the  preceding  yell,  that  we  in  the 
boats  were  scarcely  able  to  hear  each  other  speak,  and 
when  the  -<e  tumult  dwindled  to  a calm,5''  we  set  about 
endeavouring  to  make  them  understand  that  we  wanted 
either  fresh  animal  or  vegetable  provision,  but  we  were 
not  destined  to  make  the  slightest  impression  in  that 
respect,  although  some  of  our  men  crowed  like  a cock 
to  make  them  know  that  we  wanted  fowls,  others 
squeaked  and  grunted  like  a pig,  but  all  our  talent  and 
ingenuity  in  these  ventriloquisms  were  thrown  away 
upon  these  people,  who  stared  in  vacant  astonishment 
at  our  curious  gesticulations  and  sounds. 

We  succeeded  a little  better  with  regard  to  other 
matters  ; for  when  we  shewed  a young  man  a portion  of 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


308 


a yam  which  we  had  brought  from  the  ship*  the  poor 
fellow  paid  the  greatest  possible  attention  to  our  signs 
in  order  to  understand  our  wants ; his  mental  struggles 
for  that  purpose  were  vehement,  and  when  he  thought 
he  had  obtained  the  much-desired  information  he  dashed 
off  in  his  little  canoe,  in  which  he  was  alone,  with  such 
remarkable  energy  of  manner  and  desire  to  please,  that 
his  acts  formed  one  of  the  most  interesting  features  of 
the  scene : he  stood  in  the  centre  of  his  pigmy  canoe, 
and  dashed  his  paddle  into  the  water  on  either  side, 
alternating  with  such  quickness  and  power  as  to  make 
his  little  bark  rush  over  the  yielding  fluid  with  amazing 
speed ; he  very  quickly  returned,  using  all  his  strength 
in  the  same  manner  as  he  went,  and  when  he  came 
alongside  our  boat  he  was  almost  breathless,  and  was  in 
a most  agitated  state, -—he  had  brought  a small  plant  in 
his  hand,  which  was  not  the  kind  we  wanted,  nor  did 
it  appear  of  any  service  whatever  to  us ; and  when 
he  found  all  his  exertions  had  been  entirely  fruitless, 
he  put  on  a visage  that  surpassed  all  woe-begones  that 
I had  ever  seen  before  ; however,  we  did  not  allow 
him  to  go  unrewarded  for  his  trouble  and  good-will, 
which  quickly  brought  back  the  agreeable  aspect  that 
he  had  for  a short  time  lost. 

We  now  saw  a very  large  canoe,  completely  filled 
with  people,  putting  off  from  the  shore,  and  as  it  came 
slowly  towards  us  we  had  doubts  arise  in  our  minds  as 
to  their  intentions,  which  caused  us  to  look  round  for 
the  ship,  when  to  our  great  surprise  we  found  we  had 
drifted  from  her  about  two  miles  ; this  discovery  did 


304 


SOUTH  SEA 


not  decrease  our  uneasiness,  particularly  as  we  now 
found  that  we  were  surrounded  with  canoes  which  were 
filled  with  men  and  boys.  We,  however,  determined  to 
lie  to  our  oars,  and  propel  the  boats  as  quickly  towards 
them  as  possible,  and  the  men  laid  upon  them  with  all 
their  strength,  and  our  two  -whale-boats  dashed  along 
with  the  greatest  rapidity.  When  the  people  in  the 
canoes  which  lay  in  our  course  sawT  us  approach  with 
such  velocity  and  animation,  our  men  hallooing  with  all 
their  might  at  the  same  time,  with  the  oars  alternately 
swinging  in  the  air,  and  then  dashing  into  the  water 
with  great  force  and  quickness,  wonder  and  fear  took 
possession  of  their  minds,  so  that  they  scarcely  knew 
how  to  move  their  canoes  out  of  our  way  ; we  quickly 
shot  alongside  the  large  canoe  and  looked  into  it,  to 
discover  whether  they  had  brought  any  arms  with  them 
from  the  shore,  and  soon  finding  that  they  had  not,  oiij* 
mistrust  of  these  people  now  entirely  gave  way  to  confi- 
dence, and  we  again  commenced  our  telegraphic  com- 
munications. In  the  stern  of  the  canoe,  seated  in  great 
apparent  majesty,  was  an  intelligent-looking  lad,  who 
seemed  to  observe  with  much  interest  our  various  pro- 
ceedings. It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  among  these 
people  the  mental  power  declines  very  soon,  and  it  is 
only  among  the  young  that  any  signs  of  it  are  manifest, 
indicated  by  the  brightness  of  intelligence  beaming  from 
the  eyes  of  the  youth  of  both  sexes,  compared  wdtli  the 
dull  and  vacant  expression  in  those  but  little  advanced 
beyond  the  middle  age. 

We  saw  no  women  or  girls  except  upon  the  shore ; 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


805 


but  besides  the  persons  I have  mentioned  before,  others 
were  seen  of  a much  more  advanced  age,  having  grey 
hair,  and  other  signs  of  decay  ; there  was  “ no  specula- 
tion’’ in  their  eyes,  and  they  were  almost  inanimate  in 
their  motions,  but  still  curiosity  held  possession  of  their 
minds,  although  it  shewed  itself  in  a feeble  manner. 

The  middle-aged  men  appeared  to  possess  the  greatest 
muscular  strength,  but  the  drowsy  visage  betokened 
premature  mental  decay,  while  the  boys  appeared  remark- 
ably healthy  both  in  body  and  mind,  possessing  great 
apparent  shrewdness,  and  desire  to  learn,  which  was 
plainly  demonstrated  by  the  manner  in  which  they  ex- 
amined our  boat,  and  compared  its  make  with  that  of 
their  own  canoes,  the  fastenings  of  the  planks,  the 
manner  in  which  they  were  laid,  the  form  of  our  oars, 
and  the  manner  of  using  them,  — all  were  closely  scru- 
tinised by  these  intelligent  little  fellows.  Our  boat’s 
keg,  which  contained  water  for  the  crew,  came  in  for  a 
considerable  share  of  their  attention,  and  when  they 
found  anything  very  surprising,  as  some  of  our  clothing, 
they  gave  a sudden  hiss,  or  a sharp  whistle,  and  smacked 
their  fingers  together  with  a sudden  jerk,  as  some  people 
do  after  taking  a pinch  of  snuff.  I found  one  of  them, 
while  I was  turned  slightly  from  him,  very  busy  in 
comparing  the  colour  of  our  complexions,  and  as  my 
hands  and  face  were  brown  from  the  action  of  the  sun 
upon  them  during  the  many  months’  exposure  in  the 
different  regions  I had  passed,  I thought  it  would  be 
more  surprising  to  him  if  I shewed  him  the  real  colour 
of  the  skin,  and  I therefore  stripped  the  sleeve  of  my 


306 


SOUTH  SEA 


shirt  over  my  elbow,  and  compared  my  arm  with  his, 
which  was  nearly  black  ; —when,  his  fellow-countrymen 
saw  the  great  difference  of  our  colour,  they  set  up  an- 
other  shout,  resembling  that  which  was  heard  when  the 
cap  scene  was  enacted. 

After  this  they  pressed  us  very  much  to  go  on  shore, 
making  signs  for  that  purpose  in  which  their  pantomime 
was  quite  equal  to  our  ventriloquism,  laying  their  heads 
upon  their  hands  and  shutting  their  eyes  to  denote  that 
we  might  sleep  there,  also  motioning  with  their  hands 
and  mouths  as  if  they  were  eating,  to  convince  us  that 
they  could  also  give  us  something  for  that  purpose. 
They  appeared  well  fed,  and  all  of  them  seemed  happy ; 
we  saw  no  misery  depicted  in  their  countenances,  for 
although  some  of  their  faces  lacked  animation,  yet  they 
did  not  droop  in  melancholy.  Such  were  the  manners 
and  appearances  of  these  primitive  men,  these  unedu- 
cated mortals,  the  plain  tablets  of  whose  minds  were  as 
yet  unwritten  on  ; they  knew  naught  of  the  thousand 
arts,  of  which  we  boast, — the  proud  steam-boat  had 
never  ploughed  their  deeps,  spurning  wind  and  waves  ; 
the  spinning-jenny  had  not  performed  its  wonders  in 
their  happy  land  ; gas  did  not  illumine  the  dark  circuit- 
ous forest,  or  beachy  way  of  their  night  wanderings  ; rail- 
roads had  not  perforated  the  rocky  mountain,  or  crossed 
the  ravined  valley  with  a wondrous  stretch  ; their  air 
was  not  navigated,  their  sea  was  not  traversed,  their 
earth  was  not  perforated  by  man ; they  had  neither  rum 
nor  missionaries,— but  still  they  were  happy ! 

When  we  found  that  no  refreshment  of  any  kind 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


307 


could  be  obtained,  we  set  about  returning  to  the  ship, 
and  being  at  that  time  pretty  close  to  the  shore,  we 
observed  a large  concourse  of  people  standing  all  along 
it,  at  the  edge  of  the  sea,  numbers  of  women  and  chil- 
dren being  among  them.  We  now  determined,  before 
we  took  our  departure,  to  shew  these  also  at  what  rate 
we  could  propel  the  boats,  and  when  we  were  within 
twenty  yards  of  the  beach,  we  steered  along  it ; great 
excitement  was  now  shewn  by  these  people,  by  some  of 
them  running  to  and  fro,  calling  others  from  the  woods 
to  come  and  view  us.  The  men  now  sprang  with  all 
their  power  upon  their  oars,  which  propelled  the  boats 
with  great  velocity-then  the  whole  mass  of  people  ran 
along  the  beach  after  us,  although  it  was  very  rocky, 
and  full  of  sharp  points.  All  the  canoes  which  were 
outside  of  us,  also  got  in  motion  to  follow  us,  and  a 
very  animated  scene  commenced— they  all  began  their 
yelling  again,  and  great  was  the  noise  they  made.  I 
can  never  forget  one  middle-aged  woman  who  ran  along 
the  beach  with  a child  in  her  arms,  with  her  very  elon- 
gated breasts  swinging  about  like  long  leathern  pouches, 
she  appeared  frantic  with  joy,  or  excitement  of  some 
kind  at  seeing  us — she  headed  the  crowd  and  followed 
us  a long  way,  making  various  motions  and  cries,  until 
she  and  all  the  rest  were  stopped  by  an  inlet  of  the  sea 
which  ran  into  the  shore — at  the  angle  of  which  they  all 
congregated,  and  remained,  still  uttering  loud  cries,  and 
making  various  motions  to  induce  us  to  land ; but  we 
did  not  wish  to  trust  ourselves  entirely  within  their 
power,  not  knowing  how  their  conduct  might  then  have 


308 


SOUTH  SEA 


changed.  The  young  man  who  was  so  active  in  going 
on  shore  to  procure  the  vegetable  we  wanted,  and  whom 
I have  mentioned  in  a former  part  of  this  account,  still 
followed  us  in  his  little  canoe,  leaving  all  the  rest  behind ; 
but  he  also  gradually  fell  astern,  and  when  he  found 
that  we  were  getting  so  far  ahead  that  there  was  no 
chance  of  his  coming  up  with  us,  we  saw  him  reluctantly 
give  up  paddling,  and  crouch  down  in  his  canoe  and 
observe  our  approach  to  the  ship.  When  we  arrived  on 
board  we  found  the  captain  had  determined  to  steer 
immediately  to  the  southward,  and  a fresh  breeze  spring- 
ing  up,  we  soon  lost  sight  of  our  new  acquaintances, 
leaving  them  to  wonder  at  the  purport  of  our  visit,  and 
enjoy  their  strange  fancies,  caused  by  our  appearance, 
and  the  things  which  we  possessed. 

Since  our  arrival  at  this  place,  we  had  not  yet  seen  a 
single  sperm  whale,  and  therefore  we  still  continued  our 
course  to  the  southward,  in  the  hope  that  we  should 
meet  with  more  success,  shaping  our  course  towards  the 
north-eastern  part  of  New  Holland,  or  Australia  ; but 
before  we  arrived  there,  we  were  doomed  to  endure  the 
inactivity  and  listlessness  of  a calm  of  no  ordinary 
duration,  and  which  was  the  most  trying  occurrence 
that  we  had  suffered  during  the  whole  voyage,  because 
of  its  long  continuance,  and  our  impatience,  which  was 
much  heightened  from  our  ill  success  in  not  seeing 
whales,  and  also  because  our  time  was  of  great  conse- 
quence ; and  moreover  we  stood  in  need  of  refreshment 
for  the  crew,  some  of  whom  began  to  shew  symptoms 
of  great  debility. 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


309 


On  the  15 tli  of  January  1832,  we  were  not  far  distant 
from  “Lucansay?s  Islands”  and  reefs,  which  lie  in  the 
longitude  of  149°  30'  east,  and  in  the  latitude  of  8°  20' 
south.  They  are  very  low,  being  scarcely  above  the 
level  of  the  sea,  but  they  are  covered  with  trees  and 
verdure. 

For  several  days  before  we  arrived  near  these  islands 
we  had  experienced  light  and  variable  winds,  but  on 
the  day  mentioned  above  we  found  ourselves  totally 
becalmed,  and  the  motion  of  the  sea  gradually  ceased 
until  it  became  entirely  motionless,  and  appeared  like  an 
immense  sheet  of  polished  glass.  When  the  calm  had 
continued  for  three  days  and  nights,  and  we  still  found 
not  a breath  of  wind  stirring,  impatient  uneasiness 
became  depicted  in  every  face ; the  ship  had  been 
repaired  in  her  rigging,  the  casks  in  her  hold  had  been 
re-stowed,  and  everything  connected  with  the  business  of 
the  ship  requiring  smooth  water  had  been  done,  and  we 
now  only  waited  for  a pleasant  breeze  to  waft  us  along. 
But  it  came  not,  and  nights  and  days  passed  away,  and 
not  even  a “flaw”  ruffled  the  blue  surface  of  the  even 
deep ; the  sails  hung  motionless  from  the  yards,  the 
ship  lay  perfectly  still,  a dead  silence  reigned  around. 
Many  of  our  sailors  lay  below,  drowning  their  sorrows 
in  oblivious  sleep,  while  of  those  who  were  on  deck  to 
keep  the  formal  watch,  some  leaned  drowsily  upon  the 
rail,  others  sat  musing  over  their  past  fate,  while  a few 
beguiled  the  dull  time  by  working  the  “ cinnit  ” hat, 
carving  the  whalebone  stick,  or  fashioning  the  tortoise- 
shell ring  for  those  who  were  far,  very  far,  away.  The 


310 


SOUTH  SEA 


sun  threw  its  scorching  rays  upon  the  whitened  deck, 
and  by  its  reflection  redoubled  the  insufferable  light  and 
heat.  Not  a fish  enlivened  the  barren  waters  ; a solitary 
bird  now  and  then  passed  along,  struggling  with  lazy 
flight,  but  nothing  arose  to  rouse  us  from  the  dreary 
stillness  which  prevailed.  At  night  no  sound  of  rushing 
water  passed  outside  the  plank,  no  hissing  spray  dis- 
turbed the  sailor’s  sleep,— naught  but  the  solitary  sound 
of  the  watch’s  footstep  could  be  heard  above,  with  now 
and  then  the  impatient  whistle,  with  “blow  Saint  An- 
tonio ” breaking  from  their  lips,  invoking  the  wind  in 
the  old  Spanish  style.  And  then,  when  all  was  hushed 
again,  the  thought  of  home  would  rise ! the  long  con- 
tinued absence  from  the  girls  they  loved,— the  mighty 
distance  that  between  them  lies,— the  thought  of  faith- 
lessness of  those  to  whom  betrothed,— the  favoured  rival 
carrying  off  the  prize,— the  dangers  they  have  passed 
and  which  are  yet  to  come,— all  fell  upon  the  inactive 
and  melancholy  mind. 

Eight  days  and  nights  had  now  passed  in  almost  a 
“ dead  calm,”  during  which  our  mental  sufferings  were 
such  as  to  defy  description,  and  nothing  but  being 
placed  in  the  same  situation  could  convince  those  who 
have  not  the  power  to  imagine  its  monotonous  dreari- 
ness ; but  on  the  ninth  morning  a gradual  swell  of  the 
sea  arose,  which  to  our  unspeakable  delight  was  followed 
by  a gentle  wind.  Awray  dull  melancholy  fled,  and  buoy- 
ant hope  again  sprang  up  with  jocund  bound,  and 
cheered  the  sailor’s  heart. 

We  now  sailed  onwards  to  the  “ Lousiade  Islands,”' 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


311 


which  are  not  far  distant  from  the  north-eastern  part  of 
New  Holland.  When  we  arrived  we  sailed  about  them 
for  two  or  three  days,  but  we  saw  no  whales.  On  the 
third  after  making  them,  two  boats  were  sent  on  shore 
for  the  purpose  of  procuring  a few  cocoa-nuts,  and  we 
started  for  that  purpose  rather  early  in  the  day.  In  our 
passage  we  found  the  sun  intolerably  hot,  and  we  passed 
among  several  small  islands  before  w’e  arrived  at  that 
upon  which  we  wished  to  land.  The  scenery  all  around 
was  remarkably  wild  and  beautiful ; the  islands  which 
we  threaded  were  surrounded  with  coral  reefs,  some 
nearly  level  with  the  surface  of  the  sea,  and  some  we 
could  perceive  several  feet  below  it,  which  were  inha- 
bited by  great  numbers  of  fish  of  various  kinds.  All 
the  islands  were  covered  with  a rich  foliage  down  to 
the  water’s  edge,  the  various  tints  of  which  added  to 
the  rare  beauty  of  the  scene.  Several  large  trees  grew 
here  and  there,  upon  which  we  saw  some  enormous 
birds  of  the  vulture  kind.  As  we  passed  along  wre 
landed  on  one  of  the  small  islands,  which  was  not  en- 
tirely covered  with  verdure,  a few  bare  patches  of  white 
sand  existing  in  a few  places,  and  reflecting  the  rays  of 
the  sun  in  a very  powerful  degree.  When  we  landed, 
we  found  the  heat  upon  it  perfectly  insufferable,  and  we 
were  very  soon  glad  to  get  into  the  boats  again,  and 
lave  our  hands  and  feet  in  the  cool  ocean.  But  although 
the  heat  was  so  unendurable  to  us,  we  saw  huddled 
together  on  the  sand  hundreds  of  black  birds,  which  are 
about  the  size  of  a pigeon,  called  <€  noddies”  by  the 
sailors  they  actually  appeared  quite  chilly,  and  they 


SOUTH  SEA 


crowded  together  as  if  loath  to  part  with  an  atom  of  the 
heat,  which  we  were  very  glad  to  get  rid  of. 

We  again  continued  our  course  between  various  small 
islands,  which  appeared  like  an  immense  garden,  inter- 
sected with  beautiful  lakes  of  a crystal  clearness,  ex- 
posing their  sub-marine  curiosities.  As  we  continued 
our  course,  we  very  nearly  came  in  contact  with  a beau- 
tiful paper-nautilus  as  it  was  sailing  and  rowing  along, 
but  we  were  not  fortunate  enough  to  get  sufficiently 
near  to  catch  it  before  it  descended,  being  disturbed 
by  the  approach  of  the  boats.  We  now  made  a sudden 
turn  round  one  of  the  islands,  and  much  to  our  sur- 
prise we  came  in  contact  with  a canoe  containing  two 
men,  who  immediately  jumped  overboard,  and  dived 
to  a considerable  distance  before  they  again  appear- 
ed wishing  to  convince  them  that  we  were  not  un- 
friendly, we  gave  them  chase,  and  in  a short  time 
we  succeeded  in  getting  them  both  into  one  of  our 
boats.  The  poor  fellows  were  dreadfully  alarmed,  and 
we  could  not  succeed  in  quieting  their  uneasiness  until 
we  placed  them  again  in  their  canoe,  and  motioned  to 
them  to  go  away,  which  they  readily  did,  going  slowly 
and  fearfully  at  first,  but  when  they  got  a sufficient 
distance,  and  knew  that  they  could  gain  the  shore 
before  we  could  overtake  them,  even  if  we  had  wished 
to  do  so,  they  began  using  a kind  of  oar  which  they  had 
with  great  energy,  and  seemed  suddenly  to  possess  new 
life.  We  found,  on  looking  into  their  canoe,  that  they 
were  fishermen,  and  had  come  out,  no  doubt,  to  pursue 
their  avocations.  We  now  once  more  commenced  our 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


313 


journey  towards  the  island  upon  which  we  wished  to 
land  to  procure  some  cocoa  nuts,  and  we  were  not  long 
before  we  arrived  there,  from  near  the  edge  of  which  a 
few  cocoa-nut  trees  reared  their  heads  to  an  extraordi- 
nary height,— they  were  above  eighty  feet  in  altitude, 
and  they  were  the  only  trees  of  the  kind  that  we  could 
perceive  within  a mile.  Directly  we  landed  we  saw  an 
animal  dart  through  the  foliage  having  the  form  of  a 
lizard,  which  appeared  upwards  of  three  feet  in  length, 
but  its  flight  was  so  sudden  that  we  had  no  time  to 
observe  its  entire  form.  We  now  set  two  of  our  Sand- 
wich islanders  to  climb  the  cocoa-nut  trees,  which  they 
speedily  did  by  the  use  of  a band,  which  embraced  them 
and  the  trees  likewise,  it  being  placed  a little  below  the 
climbers’  arms,  when  by  means  of  their  knees  and  hands 
they  ascended  those  tall  trees  with  ease  and  celerity, 
and  they  soon  began  to  throw  down  the  cocoa  nuts 
which  they  found  at  their  tops  in  great  numbers.  They 
were  the  largest  and  finest  I ever  saw,  and  such  was 
their  weight  and  richness  that  they  burst  into  pieces 
when  they  came  in  contact  with  the  sand,  and  we  lost 
all  their  milk,  or  nearly  so  ; our  sailors  however,  not 
choosing  to  lose  their  long-expected  treat,  caught  them 
up  as  they  fell,  and  drank  as  much  of  the  delicious 
juice  as  they  could  save,  but  unfortunately,  one  of  them 
in  falling  came  in  contact  with  the  hip  of  one  of  our 
men,  and  felled  him  to  the  earth  with  such  violence, 
that  after  he  fell  he  continued  to  lie  apparently  lifeless 
upon  the  sand.  We  called  to  the  islanders  to  cease 
throwing  down  any  more,  and  we  ran  towards  Steward, 


p 


SOUTH  SEA 


o I 4 
ts  i rk 

(for  so  he  was  called)  to  render  him  assistance.  But  at 
this  moment  we  heard  the  men  who  were  up  the  trees 
calling  out  with  great  earnestness  that  they  could  per- 
ceive a large  number  of  canoes  filled  with  people  ap- 
proaching the  island  upon  which  we  were,  and  on  looking 
up  we  saw  them  descending  the  trees  with  the  greatest 
precipitation  and  alarm. 

We  lost  no  time  in  gathering  the  nuts,  and  placing 
them  in  the  boats,  not  forgetting  our  wounded  compa- 
nion, whose  hip  was  fractured,  and  who  appeared  in  the 
arms  of  death.  We  crowded  to  our  boats  as  fast  as 
possible,  and  pushed  from  the  shore,  when  on  turning 
a point  of  land  we  saw  several  large  canoes  filled  with 
natives  coming  towards  us,  uttering  loud  cries,  and 
appearing  much  excited ; we  were  not  more  than  a 
quarter  of  a mile  from  them,  and  we  expected  to  receive 
a shower  of  arrows  every  moment.  We  had  among 
us  three  muskets  loaded  with  slugs,  and  prepared  to 
fire  had  the  attack  been  made  ; but  we  fortunately  had 
no  occasion  for  their  employment,  for  our  men,  seeing 
their  danger,  strained  at  their  oars  with  all  their  strength, 
and  before  we  had  much  time  for  thought,  we  found  our- 
selves beyond  the  reach  of  their  arrows,  making  the  best 
of  our  way  to  the  ship,  which  we  soon  reached. 

In  this  affair  we  had  doubtless  trespassed  on  the 
property  of  these  people,  and  destroyed  part  of  their 
expected  harvest,  and  should  have  suffered  severely  for 
our  temerity  but  for  the  timely  warning  of  those  who 
had  ascended  the  trees.  Our  captain,  soon  after  our 
arrival  on  board,  ordered  all  sail  to  be  set,  and  the  ship’s 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


315 


head  was  placed  to  the  northward,  for  since  our  arrival 
at  this  place  we  had  not  seen  a single  whale  ; and,  more« 
over,  we  found  strong  currents  frequently  setting  in 
among  the  islands,  to  which  we  were  often  so  near  that 
we  were  afraid  of  being  drawn  in  among  them  in  the 
night,  when  calms  prevailed,  and  all  command  of  the 
ship  lost. 

On  the  20th  of  January,  1832,  we  arrived  off  Bou- 
gainville, another  large  island,  consisting  of  very  high 
land,  covered  with  verdure  to  the  water’s  edge,  and 
situated  about  the  longitude  of  149°  east,  and  in  the 
latitude  of  about  6°  south.  As  we  sailed  along  its  coast 
we  saw  smoke  ascending  from  it  in  several  places,  and 
in  a short  time  a few  miserable -looking  natives  paid  us 
a visit  in  their  canoes,  but  who  appeared  to  feel  no  ex- 
citement whatever  at  seeing  us,  having  no  doubt  seen 
several  ships  before.  When  they  came  alongside,  one  of 
them  held  up  about  a dozen  small  fish  of  the  size  of 
sprats,  strung  upon  a twig, —he  offered  them  to  us, 
calling  out  at  the  same  time,  “irum,  irum,”  meaning 
that  he  wished  for  iron  in  exchange  for  them.  One  of 
his  companions  also  wished  for  the  same,  offering  in 
exchange  a curious  fish,  which  is  known  to  naturalists 
as  the  prickly  chetodon,  while  others  wished  to  bargain 
for  their  bows  and  arrows,  which  are  deemed  the  most 
powerful  and  the  best  that  are  brought  from  the  South 
Seas  ; the  former  are  remarkably  strong,  about  six  feet 
in  length,  while  the  latter  are  beautifully  and  most 
ingeniously  barbed.  The  few  natives  of  this  place  which 
I had  an  opportunity  of  observing,  had  the  most  sullen 


316 


SOUTH  SEA 


and  forbidding  aspect  of  any  I had  yet  seen  during  the 
voyage*— not  a ray  of  good-nature  could  be  observed  in 
their  countenances,— the  dreary  mind  appeared  in  the 
dingy  face, — there  was  no  merry  fancy  in  the  eye,— the 
dark  and  corrugated  brow  betokened  the  sullen  soul,— no 
friendly  laugh  enlivened  the  gloomy  crew,  but  a dull 
savage  aspect  appeared  on  all.  Whalers  when  in  chase 
off  this  island  always  carry  loaded  muskets  in  their 
boats,  to  protect  themselves  from  the  attacks  which 
these  savages  often  make  upon  them  when  they  are  led 
by  their  ardour  in  the  chase  too  near  the  shore.  Dread- 
ful conflicts  have  from  time  to  time  taken  place  between 
them,  in  which  many  of  the  natives  and  some  Europeans 
have  lost  their  lives. 

It  was  off  this  island  too,  that  we  miraculously 
escaped  being  wrecked,  which  made  our  third  escape 
during  the  voyage.  We  were  sailing  along  the  coast, 
at  the  distance  from  it  of  about  ten  or  twelve  miles, 
when  our  second  mate,  who  was  at  the  main-mast  head 
looking  out  for  whales,  called  out  in  a loud  voice  for 
the  helmsman  to  “ up  helm  and  allow  the  ship  to  fall 
off  her  course.  Our  captain,  who  was  on  deck  at  the 
time,  hearing  him  call  so  vehemently,  imagined  that 
whales  had  come  up  close  to  the  ship,  when  instead  of 
allowing  the  helm  to  be  put  up,  he  ran  round  the  ship 
looking  for  whales,— a great  deal  of  confusion  ensued, 
during  which,  to  our  astonishment  the  ship  passed  over 
a coral  reef,  which  was  just  deep  enough  to  allow  her  to 
pass  over  without  touching  it,  although  some  of  our 
people  who  were  below  at  the  time  stated  they  felt  the 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


817 


ship  grate  over  the  crumbling  rocks.  The  moment  I 
found  what  was  going  on,  I ran  to  the  waist  of  the  ship, 
and  looking  dowm  saw  the  coral  and  rocky  banks  under 
us,  with  several  projecting  clumps,  which  the  ship  was 
so  fortunate  as  to  pass  between.  The  sensation  I ex- 
perienced at  so  suddenly  finding  ourselves  in  so  dread- 
ful a situation  may  be  more  easily  felt  than  described, 
for  while  the  ship  was  passing  over  the  reef,  seeing  that 
there  was  nothing  to  be  done  but  to  continue  our  course* 
I stood  fixed  by  the  rail,  expecting  every  moment  a 
horrible  crash  to  ensue,  that  would  have  tumbled  all 
our  sails  and  masts  overboard ; for  as  the  ship  was  sail- 
ing quickly  at  the  time,  the  concussion  must  have  been 
most  violent  had  she  met  with  any  sudden  resistance. 
We  were  so  near  the  top  of  the  reef,  as  we  passed  over 
it,  that  I could  even  see  some  small  shells  which  lay 
upon  its  surface.  We  became  dreadfully  alarmed  at 
this  new  and  unexpected  danger,  for  the  charts  gave  us 
no  information  or  warning  of  anything  of  the  kind. 

We  sincerely  thanked  the  Disposer  of  all  things  for 
again  preserving  us  from  so  horrible  a calamity ; as  in 
the  event  of  our  shipwreck  in  this  part  of  the  world  we 
should  have  been  surrounded  by  savages  whose  sordid 
souls  know  naught  of  kindness  to  the  stranger.  There, 
no  helping  hand  would  have  been  stretched  forth  to 
snatch  us  from  the  ocean  grave— no  compassionate  heart 
would  have  thrilled  at  witnessing  our  misfortunes— no 
hospitable  roof  was  there,  to  shade  us  from  the  scorching 
sun,  or  under  which  we  could  have  rested  our  wearied, 
or  perhaps  wounded  limbs.  The  noise  of  the  cracking 


818 


SOUTH  SEA 


timbers  would  have  been  joined  with  the  savage  exult- 
ing shouts  of  barbarians— thirsting  for  blood  and  gain— 
the  spear  of  the  savage  would  have  quivered  above,  and 
the  jaws  of  the  cold  ocean  would  have  waited  for  us 
below. 

Shortly  after  we  had  escaped  this  reef,  we  found  the 
centre  of  the  high  land  of  Bougainville  to  bear  east- 
north-east,  and  we  were  distant  from  the  shore  about 
ten  or  twelve  miles.  While  off  this  island  on  the  22d 
of  January  1832,  we  killed  a female  whale,  which  pro- 
duced us  sixteen  barrels  of  oil,  being  the  only  one  we 
had  captured  since  our  departure  from  Japan, 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


319 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


As  it  was  our  captain’s  determination  to  go  off  to  the 
“ Ladrone  Islands  ” to  refresh,  we  still  continued  our 
course  to  the  northward,  so  that  on  the  29th  of  January 
1832,  New  Ireland  was  again  in  sight,  bearing  n.  n.  w., 
and  at  sunrise  on  the  morning  of  the  31st,  we  found 
ourselves  under  the  lee  of  Saint  John’s  Island,  the 
centre  of  which  also  bore  from  the  ship  about  north, 
and  which  is  situated  in  the  longitude  of  150°  50'  east, 
and  in  the  latitude  of  3°  5'  south*  The  islands  which 
are  marked  on  the  charts,  and  named  u Hardy’s  and 
“ Hunter’s”  Islands,  cannot  be  in  real  existence  : we 
passed  over  their  sites,  as  they  are  laid  down  on  the 
charts,  and  could  see  nothing  of  them. 

At  ten  a.  m.,  two  boats  were  sent  on  shore  on  the 
south  side  of  Saint  John’s  Island,  to  endeavour  to  pro- 
cure some  yams  from  its  inhabitants,— and  we  had  no 
sooner  got  within  half  a ship’s  length  of  the  shore  than 
we  saw  one  of  the  natives  wading  towards  us  with  a 
small  basket  containing  about  ten  or  a dozen  bulbous 
roots,  somewhat  resembling  a potato,  and  which  we 
afterwards  found  was  not  much  inferior  in  taste.  When 
he  arrived  near  the  boat,  we  gave  him  a piece  of  old 
iron  hoop  about  four  inches  long  for  them,  with  which 


SOUTH  SEA 


he  appeared  delighted,  and  scampering  off  to  the  shore, 
he  soon  spread  wide  his  great  success  among  his  fellow 
countrymen,  who  immediately  followed  his  example, 
and  in  about  two  hours  we  had  half  filled  our  boats 
with  these  roots,  and  having  consumed  our  stock  of  old 
iron,  were  obliged  to  return  to  the  ship  for  a further 
supply,  making  signs  as  we  left  them  that  we  should 
quickly  return*  Our  people  on  board  were  also  in 
turn  delighted  with  our  success,  and  after  we  had  sup  - 
plied ourselves  with  the  much  coveted  iron,  we  speedily 
returned  to  our  newly  found  market.  When  we  again 
drew  near  to  the  shore,  we  perceived  that  a very  great 
number  of  people  had  congregated  upon  it,  most  of 
whom  were  waiting  with  their  baskets  of  potatos  ready 
for  exchange,  and  when  we  arrived  near  to  them  we 
placed  our  boats5  sterns  close  to  the  shore,  with  the  men 
lying  constantly  on  their  oars  ready  for  a start  in  case 
our  new  acquaintances  should  become  unruly,  seeing 
that  a scuffling  arose  among  them  upon  the  shore,  about 
who  should  be  foremost  in  the  throng. 

They  soon  made  a rush  towards  our  boats,  and  the 
commodities  were  exchanged  on  both  sides  with  great 
celerity ; wading  up  to  their  waists,  they  offered  their 
little  baskets  made  of  the  branches  of  the  cocoa-nut  tree 
containing  the  roots,  with  a cheerful  face,  which  was 
rendered  more  so  when  they  received  the  morsel  of  rusty 
old  iron-hoop  which  we  handed  to  them. 

We  soon  found  them  a bold  warlike  people,  remark** 
ably  quick  in  their  manners,  with  large  frames  an<^ 
great  strength,  holding  themselves  upright,  shewing  a 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


821 


bold,  elevated  front,  with  face  erect  and  cheerful,  but 
still  appearing  as  if  they  could  be  easily  excited  to 
quarrel.  These  people  are  of  a dark-brown  colour, 
approaching  to  black,  with  stout  and  well-proportioned 
limbs,  many  of  them  being  above  six  feet  in  height. 
They  had  hair,  which  they  wore  in  considerable  quan- 
tities, all  frizzled  out,  forming  an  immense  mass  or 
bush,  coloured  either  with  white  or  red  powder.  A 
small  piece  of  wood,  about  the  thickness  of  a crow-quill, 
was  thrust  completely  through  the  whole  thickness  of 
the  nose  at  its  lower  part,  in  a transverse  direction,  the 
aperture  through  which  it  was  passed  being  in  most  of 

them  much  inflamed  and  ulcerated.  Some  of  them  had 

« 

their  nostrils  distended  by  placing  small  props  of  wood 
inside  of  them  crosswise.  They  were  quite  large  enough 
naturally,  to  my  taste,  without  any  artificial  increase  of 
the  dimensions  of  those  nasal  caverns  ; and,  when  we 
consider  the  pain  and  inconvenience  which  they  must 
have  endured  from  these  props  and  crossbars,  nothing 
but  an  idea  of  their  personal  beauty  being  prodigiously 
increased  bv  their  use,  could  have  reconciled  them  to 
their  adoption.  They  were  entirely  naked,  merely 
having  their  bodies  coloured  with  various  devices,  but 
they  were  not  tattooed. 

After  we  had  nearly  filled  our  boats  with  their  pro- 
duce, we  found  the  evening  was  fast  approaching,  and 
pointing  to  the  glorious  sun,  which  was  once  more  dis- 
appearing below  the  fluid  horizon,  we  made  signs  to 
them  that  we  would  return  when  it  rose  again,  which 
they  soon  perfectly  understood,  and  we  took  our  depar- 

p 2 


322 


SOUTH  SEA 


ture ; when  the  sun  once  more  gilded  the  eastern  sky 
with  his  presence,  his  first  rays  illumined  our  pas- 
sage  to  the  shore,  and  we  found  on  our  arrival  many  of 
the  natives  anxiously  waiting  for  our  approach.  We 
soon  commenced  our  bartering  again,  but  we  found  that 
many  of  our  friends  had  been  very  industrious  during 
the  night,  for  they  appeared  with  their  faces  and  parts  of 
their  bodies  freshly  and  curiously  painted,  some  of  them 
having  an  oblique  line  drawn  across  the  face,  with  one 
side  of  it  painted  red  and  the  other  white.  Some  of 
them  had  the  line  of  division  drawn  directly  across, 
having  the  upper  part  of  the  face  red  and  the  lower 
white.  Their  hair  also  was  filled  with  a fine  powder  of 
either  of  these  colours,  which  was  also  newly  frizzled 
out  into  an  enormous  mass,  its  area  being  at  least  two 
feet  across.  Some  of  them  had  the  holes  in  their  noses 
filled  with  the  stem  of  a flower,  the  flower  resting  on  the 
cheek,  while  others  employed  for  the  same  purpose  a 
sprig  of  some  sweet  scented  shrub.  They  wore  bracelets 
of  shells  on  their  arms,  and  they  had  transverse  sections 
of  shells,  which  formed  hoops,  fitted  on  the  upper  arm 
in  such  numbers  as  to  reach  from  the  elbow  to  near  the 
shoulder.  Some  of  them  also  wore  rings  or  hoops  on 
the  same  part,  that  were  formed  of  tortoise-shell,  which 
had  been  made  from  its  flat  pieces.  These  being  placed 
close  together  on  the  arm,  a considerable  number  was 
required  “ to  make  up  a show/'  and  I counted  on  some 
of  them  above  twenty  pieces. 

They  wore  no  kind  of  clothing  whatsoever,  and  they 
traded  with  great  good-will  and  fairness.  All  of  them  were 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


323 


armed,  either  with  spears,  bows  and  arrows,  or  clubs, 
some  of  the  latter  being  of  large  dimensions.  Their 
spears  were  pointed  at  one  end  with  hard  wood,  while 
the  other  was  tastefully  ornamented  with  the  bone  of  a 
human  leg  or  arm,  according  to  the  whim  of  the  owner. 
They  appeared  to  be  capable  of  using  all  these  instru- 
ments of  war  with  the  greatest  dexterity.  One  laugh- 
ing fellow  came  close  to  me  in  the  boat,  balancing  his 
spear  on  the  palm  of  his  hand  by  the  middle  of  its  shaft, 
at  times  shaking  it  in  a fearful  manner,  and  pointed  it  to 
my  breast ; but  although  it  was  evidently  done  in  a play- 
ful manner,  I could  not  help  observing  a wildness  in  his 
eyes,  and  as  I did  not  exactly  admire  my  position,  I 
took  the  liberty  of  gently  placing  it  aside. 

Several  tall  and  warlike-looking  fellows,  armed  with 
enormous  clubs  and  long  spears,  took  possession  of  the 
beach  from  the  first  of  the  morning,  and  watched  all  our 
proceedings  with  rather  a jealous  eye,  not  seeming  to 
wish  us  to  land. 

Some  of  our  traders  appeared  with  a small  calabash  of 
slaked  lime  slung  on  their  left  arms,  while  in  their  right 
hands  they  held  the  stem  of  the  bread-fruit,  or  some- 
thing very  similar  in  appearance,  which  they  used  for 
rubbing  their  teeth,  after  they  had  dipped  it  in  the 
lime  contained  in  the  calabash.  This,  with  their  chew- 
ing of  the  betel  nut,  which  they  appeared  much  to  enjoy, 
made  their  teeth  quite  black,  an  effect  they  seemed  to 
desire  exceedingly,  as  they  exhibited  it  to  all  of  us  to 
whom  they  could  get  near  enough,  with  great  apparent 
vanity.  Such  is  the  difference  of  human  ideas  of  beauty  ! 


824 


SOUTH  SEA 


and  how  great  will  be  the  contrast,  if  it  is  made  be- 
tween the  ideas  of  these  people  and  our  own  ! Compare 
the  much-sought,  gentle,  and  well  finished  aquiline  of 
European  taste,  with  the  Saint  John’s  Islander’s  enor- 
mous, cavernous,  perforated  Thames-tunnel  nose,  and 
it  may  well  be  said  that  comparisons  are  odious.  Com- 
pare the  beautiful,  oval,  and  pearly  white  teeth  of  one 
of  our  London  belles,  with  the  short,  broad,  and  jet-black 
ones  of  the  Saint  John’s  damsels,  and  the  two  extremes 
will  meet.  But  we  are  both  equal  in  delight,  when  we 
behold  that  which  appears  most  perfect  after  our  own 
taste;— the  St.  John’s  Island  lover  observes  the  elabo- 
rately finished  nasal  organ  of  her  beloved  with  feelings  of 
admiration,  the  wider  its  base  the  more  vehement  be- 
comes her  love ; she  gazes  with  pleasure  upon  the  jet- 
black  teeth,  which  are  at  times  teazingly  hidden  from 
her  searching  and  fondest  look  by  the  motions  of  the 
thick  and  protruding  dull  red  lip.  She  reclines  on  his 
shoulder,  she  is  dazzled  with  the  transcendent  beauty  of 
the  “ human  face  divine!”  and  his  enormous  mass  of' 
frizzled  and  red  hair  forms  a canopy  for  them  both,  and 
her  real  enjoyment  of  these  things  is  not  surpassed  by 
the  most  fastidious  Parisian  lady  of  taste,  who  adores 
features  of  other  form  and  colour.  We  observed  that  some 
of  them  were  slovenly  in  their  appearance,  their  hair  had 
not  been  frizzled  out  for  some  time,  their  faces  had  not 
been  painted,  or  their  noses  newly  ornamented  ; besides, 
their  teeth  were  beginning  to  shew  the  white  enamel 
through  the  artificial  coat  of  jet,  which  was  beginning 
to  wear  off  from  the  friction  of  the  lips,  affording  a proof 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


825 


that  the  natural  enamel  was  not  injured  by  the  prepara- 
tion they  made  use  of  for  coating  it  with  jet.  In  conse- 
quence of  their  shabby  appearance,  they  seemed  corre- 
spondingly unassuming  in  their  demeanour,  and  readily 
gave  way  to  the  well-prepared  dandy  gentleman,  who 
boldly  appeared  in  all  the  ornaments  I have  mentioned 
before— with  his  bracelets  of  shells,  and  armlets  of  tor- 
toise-shell ; his  extended  nose,  his  frizzled  and  powdered 
hair,  his  jetted  teeth,  his  painted  face,  with  his  small 
neat  calabash  of  lime  hanging  from  his  left  forearm,  and 
green  bread-fruit  stems,  with  which  u ever  and  anon” 
he  chafed  his  teeth,  chewing  also  his  betel  nut,  big 
with  importance,  presenting  himself  in  studied  attitude, 
and  courting  our  notice  with  unceasing  avidity.  After 
we  had  been  on  board  to  dine,  and  had  again  returned  to 
the  shore,  we  observed  great  numbers  of  people  coming 
along  the  winding  and  sandy  beach,  apparently  from 
all  parts  of  the  island ; some  of  them  were  carrying 
potatos,  and  some  were  not.  We  had  not  seen  any  of 
their  women,  but  this  time  we  observed  a few  congre- 
gated closely  together  behind  some  trees,  where  they 
could  not  be  well  seen  by  the  people  on  the  shore,  who 
were  near  the  boats.  We  had  observed  them  for  some 
time  before  we  could  make  out  distinctly  whether  they 
were  women  or  men ; but  some  of  them  altering  their 
positions,  soon  convinced  us  what  they  were  ; and  all  of 
us  wishing  to  look  upon  the  charms  of  those  tropical 
strangers,  we  moved  our  boats  a little  distance  towards 
them,  which  had  the  effect  of  causing  them  to  disappear 
entirely — not  doing  so  in  our  opinion  from  their  own 


326 


SOUTH  SEA 


will,  but  from  the  sterner  mandates  of  their  lords  and 
masters,  who  now  noticed  them,  and  who  probably  did 
not  at  all  relish  our  moving  towards  their  better  halves. 
They  all  lost  their  cheerful  faces  in  an  instant ; fearing, 
perhaps,  that  we  were  inclined  to  be  mischievous  or  in- 
sulting. As  it  was,  we  soon  placed  our  boats  in  their 
old  situations,  and  again  commenced  our  trading,  which 
now  began  rapidly  to  decline,  our  good  friends  having 
by  this  time  exhausted  their  stores,  or  as  much  as  they 
could  spare. 

We  were  now  about  to  leave  for  ever  our  newly-found 
friends;  and  when  they  perceived  our  intention  they 
appeared  to  look  upon  it  with  regret,  yet  not  one  of  them 
invited  us  to  land.  Eut  just  as  we  were  about  to  start, 
the  women  again  made  their  appearance,  a little  nearer 
to  us  than  they  were  before.  I now  took  from  my  pocket 
a row  of  large  blue  glass  beads,  which  I held  up  towards 
them.  The  temptation  proved  too  much  for  one  of  those 
frail  beings  to  resist;  she  immediately  broke  through  all 
restraint-dashed  through  the  water — and  came  close  to 
our  boat,  wading  to  her  waist.  She  wore  no  clothes 
whatever,  but  she  appeared  exceedingly  coy,  and  much 
agitated,  no  doubt  from  the  novelty  of  her  situation. 
She  was  young,  and  her  features,  though  not  beautiful, 
were  exceedingly  interesting ; and,  altogether,  she  was 
said  by  all  of  us  to  be  a pretty  girl.  As  she  came 
close  to  our  boat,  a buzz  of  dissatisfaction  arose  among 
the  men  on  shore,  and  perhaps  their  clubs  and  spears 
were  held  with  a firmer  grasp,  but  they  contented  them- 
selves with  watching  our  proceedings,  which  altogether 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


3-27 


only  consumed  a few  minutes.  As  she  came  nearer  to 
us,  stretching  out  her  hand  impatient  of  the  prize,  I 
took  an  opportunity  of  securing  them  around  her  neck, 
when  the  moment  she  found  them  so,  and  that  she  was 
free,  she  darted  through  the  water  with  the  velocity  of 
one  of  its  most  lively  inhabitants,  and  was  soon  seen 
again  among  her  former  companions,  who  uttered  sharp, 
shrill,  and  piercing  sounds  of  joy,  while  some  of  them 
slapped  her  upon  the  back  in  a playful  manner,  and 
seemed  to  say,  66  You  slut,  how  came  you  to  venture 
among  those  strangers  in  that  imprudent  manner !”  at 
the  same  time  they  could  not  help  admiring  her  successful 
boldness,  and  the  beauty  of  the  necklace  she  had  thus 
obtained.  We  now  immediately  pushed  off  from  the 
beach,  followed  by  some  longing  eyes  from  the  female 
group.  They  were  the  only  row  of  beads  I possessed, 

or  I should  have  found  means  of  sending  some  to  the 

* 

other  women,  who  were  left  to  envy  the  success  of  their 
bold  companion. 

The  moment  after  we  had  pushed  off  from  shore,  an 
elderly  man,  who  had  been  standing  in  the  water  by  the 
side  of  our  boat  for  some  time,  suddenly  jumped  into  it, 
when  our  sailors  endeavoured  to  push  him  overboard 
again,  not  knowing  what  his  intentions  were ; but  he 
clung  to  the  boat  with  such  pertinacity  that  we  could  not 
readily  get  rid  of  him  without  employing  more  force, 
which  we  were  unwilling  to  do,  at  the  same  time  he 
made  us  understand  by  his  actions  that  he  wished  to  go 
on  board  the  ship;  we  at  length  consented,  and  the 
moment  he  took  his  seat  on  the  gunwale  of  the  boat 


3*28 


SOUTH  SEA 


another  of  those  men,  but  much  less  than  himself,  swam 
out  after  us,  and  while  swimming  by  our  side  implored 
us  to  take  him  on  board  also;  and  finding  that  our  first 
passenger  was  anxious  that  he  should  accompany  us,  we 
again  consented,  but  in  consequence  of  our  boat  being 
so  deeply  loaded,  we  were  obliged  to  set  our  sail,  and 
with  a fine  breeze  we  ran  along  at  a quick  rate.  But 
before  we  had  got  far  a sudden  squall  came  on,  accom- 
panied with  rain,  so  that  we  were  obliged  to  take  in 
part  of  our  sail  from  fear  of  being  upset.  When  the 
native  who  had  first  entered  our  boat  saw  our  anxiety, 
he  began  in  a low  murmur  an  invocation  to  the  wind. 
At  times  he  was  scarcely  audible,  but  then  muttering 
gradually  louder,  he  at  last  broke  out  into  a frantic 
wildness,  almost  choking  himself  with  his  violence— his 
countenance  being  suffused,  his  lips  covered  with  froth, 
and  his  face  directed  upwards  and  towards  the  quarter 
from  whence  the  wind  came,  the  rain  all  the  time  bespat- 
tering his  dark  visage  without  mercy. 

At  times  he  hissed  with  considerable  force,  and  then 
soon  after  he  commenced  a kind  of  chattering,  alternat- 
ing with  the  hissing,  which  was  followed  by  a jabbering 
of  his  native  tongue,  with  such  amazing  velocity  and 
passion  that  his  conduct  became  at  last  fearfully  impres- 
sive. He  appeared  at  times  like  an  infuriated  maniac — 
while  at  others  the  wild  energy  and  extraordinary  pas- 
sion into  which  he  worked  himself  gave  him  a truly 
awful  appearance.  Suddenly  he  would  cease  this  wild- 
ness, and  then  gently  and  smilingly  implore  his  deity  to 
relieve  us  from  the  violence  of  the  wind,  which  still 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


329 


being  unavailing  caused  him  to  make  use  of  intimidation, 
for  which  all  his  most  violent  gesticulations  were  brought 
into  play— so  that  he  appeared  at  first  to  gently  and 
persuasively  implore,  and  then  admonish  with  a kind  of 
brotherly  wrath ; which  being  also  unsuccessful,  was  fol- 
lowed by  an  apparent  determination  to  inflict  summary 
chastisement  upon  the  obdurate  deity  which  he  invoked, 
and  this  being  unminded,  caused  him  to  pour  out  the 
whole  phial  of  his  vindictive  anger  in  a bitterness  of 
manner  that  X find  myself  unable  to  describe.  The 
short  man  who  accompanied  him  heard  and  saw  it  all 
with  great  apparent  respect,  and  even  awe,  crouching 
down  behind  his  countryman  in  the  stern  of  the  boat. 
The  squall  soon  passed  over,  and  the  necromancer 
appeared  to  apply  the  “ flattering  unction  to  his  soul3* 
of  his  being  the  principal  cause  of  its  subsidence.  We 
soon  arrived  on  board ; and  our  two  wild  companions 
feasted  their  eyes  upon  the  various  things  around  until 
they  were  tired.  The  captain  then  gave  the  magician  a 
shirt  and  an  old  pair  of  trousers,  which  he  caused  him  to 
put  on,  and  we  then  rowed  our  two  wild  visitors  towards 
the  land ; but  before  they  got  near  to  the  shore,  we  saw 
our  enchanter  friend  take  off  his  shirt  and  trousers,  and 
rolling  them  up  place  them  under  his  arm.  Arrived 
within  a ship’s  length  of  the  beach,  he  leaped  overboard 
followed  by  his  companion;  they  quickly  made  their 
way  through  the  yielding  water,  and  penetrating  the 
thick  woods  which  grew  upon  the  borders  of  the  sea, 
disappeared  from  our  view. 

We  now  again  crowded  all  sail  for  the  Ladrone 


330 


SOUTH  SEA 


Islands,  and  bid  adieu  to  those  remote  scenes  but  seldom 
visited  by  Europeans,  except  the  daring  and  wandering 
whale  fisherman,  or  some  enterprising  spirit  searching 
for  unknown  lands. 

We  bid  adieu,  as  it  were,  to  a primitive  world,  exist- 
ing in  all  its  rude,  uncultivated  state.  We  could  not 
avoid  reflecting,  when  beholding  the  scenery  of  this 
remote  region  and  the  strange  manners  of  its  inhabitants, 
upon  the  varied  nature  of  mankind,  and  the  vast  dif- 
ference between  the  cultivated  refinement  and  advance 
in  the  arts  distinguishing  our  own  distant  home,  and  the 
manners  of  the  aboriginal  savages  around  us,  who, 
although  possessed  of  lands  and  climate  far  superior  to 
the  steril  regions  of  the  north,  were  but  little  advanced 
beyond  the  brute  creation ; while  the  European,  from 
a similar  condition,  had  in  a few  centuries  raised  himself, 
by  his  inborn  energy,  high  in  the  scale  of  intellectual 
cultivation.  Where  are  we  to  seek  the  cause  of  this  vast 
difference  ? I know  not ; and  who  would  dare  assert 
that  all  the  advantages  of  intellectual  power  shall  be  for 
ever  confined  to  the  white  portion  of  the  human  race, 
and  that  the  swarthy  inhabitants  of  these  remote  islands 
will  not  at  some  distant  period  reflect  a portion  of  the 
image  of  the  Divine  mind,  that  formed  and  governs  them 
as  well  as  us. 

As  we  still  continued  to  sail  along  the  shore,  wildly 
ornamented  as  it  was,  with  its  tall  forests,  its  luxuriant 
herbage,  its  romantic,  its  picturesque  beauties,— we 
thought  of  the  solitary  being  whose  hut  appeared  alone, 
situated  in  some  shady  nook  or  rocky  glen.  Surrounded 


i 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


331 


with  those  scenes,  we  might  have  for  a moment  con- 
sidered him  a forlorn  being  exposed  to  a thousand  wants 
— an  outcast,  a savage  ; but  if  we  examine  his  appear- 
ance, if  we  look  at  the  boldness  of  his  frame,  if  we 
notice  the  animation  in  his  eye, — the  cheerful  smile  upon 
his  face — 'the  courageous  bearing  of  his  form-— -the  loud, 
the  free,  and  careless  laugh,— then  must  we  spon- 
taneously think  of  the  meaning  of  the  poet’s  words, 
which  doubtingly  inquire,  and  state—1 “ if  ignorance  is 
bliss,  ’tis  folly  to  be  wise.”  Happiness,  that  immortal 
boon  which  all  our  arts  and  boasted  sciences  can  scarce 
confer,  is  to  be  found  within  those  burning  zones.  Under 
the  tall  and  wide-spreading  foliage  of  some  majestic  tree, 
the  rude  and  uneducated  mortal  carves  his  war-spear,  or 
forms  the  massive  club  or  barbed  arrow.  His  daughter, 
his  wife,  or  devoted  lover,  prepares  the  rude  head-dress, 
the  bracelets  of  shells,  or  twists  the  fishing-line  from 
the  fibres  of  the  cocoa-nut  husk.  If  the  call  of  hunger 
invade  them,  the  clear  ocean  spontaneously  presents  its 
living  fare,  or  the  generous  land  offers  without  cultiva- 
tion the  tempting  banana,  the  cocoa,  or  mealy  yam.  The 
cool  mountain  water  flows  at  his  feet,  and  gives  him  un- 
asked its  reviving  draught,  while  the  thick  foliage  forms 
the  shady  bower,  free  from  the  scorching  sun.  With 
these  bounteous  gifts  of  nature,  the  inhabitants  of  those 
intertropical  climes  must  enjoy  years  of  real  repose 
and  unalloyed  delight.  War,  disease,  and  famine,  may, 
as  with  us,  make  their  unwelcome  visits  ; but  they  are, 
no  doubt,  in  these  regions  “few  and  far  between.” 
During  the  night  of  the  8th  of  February  1832,  we 


832 


SOUTH  SEA 


again  crossed  the  equinoctial  line,  being  the  fourth  time 
of  doing  so  since  we  left  England.  On  the  following 
day  we  found  our  longitude  east  of  Greenwich  to  be 
159°  40'.  We  made  but  little  progress,  on  account  of 
the  prevalence  of  calms  and  light  winds,  until  we  ar- 
rived in  the  latitude  of  four  degrees  north  of  the  equator, 
when  we  fell  in  with  the  regular  north-east  trade 
winds,  which  propelled  us  at  a gallant  rate.  On  the 
13th,  just  before  sunset,  we  saw  a large  reef,  which 
extended  before  us  to  the  distance  of  several  miles,  and 
which  was  not  marked  upon  the  chart.  We  found 
our  latitude  to  be  this  day  6°  55  north,  and  our  longi- 
tude by  reckoning  154°  16'  east.  On  the  following 
day  at  sunrise  we  made  sail,  and  ran  along  its  edge,  in 
a south-west  direction,  for  about  twenty  miles.  At 
noon,  we  made  a small  island,  which  bore  at  that  time 
n.e.  by  east,  the  end  of  the  reef  bearing  east,  and  both 
distant  about  twelve  miles.  At  four  p.m.  we  had  no 
land  in  sight,  and  the  ship  again  headed  north-west® 


WHALING  VOYAGE, 


333 


CHAPTER  IX, 


On  the  21st  of  February  1832,  we  made  the  island  of 
Rota,  one  of  the  Ladrones,  which  lies  in  the  longi- 
tude of  about  154°  east,  and  in  about  the  latitude  of 
13°  39'  north.  Steering  s.s.w.  all  night,  at  daybreak  we 
found  ourselves  near  the  island  of  Guam,  which  is  the 
principal  one  of  the  group,  and  at  which  it  was  our 
determination  to  cast  anchor,  in  the  harbour  of  Port 
Apra,  as  it  is  called. 

These  majestic-looking  islands  were  discovered  by 
the  great  Portuguese  navigator,  D.  Fernando  Magallanez, 
in  1520,  and  invaded  by  the  Spaniards  in  1564,  but 
their  conquest  was  not  completed  until  the  year  1592; 
although  the  Spaniards  had  during  the  different  years  of 
their  invasion  resorted  to  their  usual  sanguinary  means, 
and  it  was  not  until  they  had  destroyed  an  immense 
number  of  the  inhabitants  that  they  could  bring  the 
warlike  Ladrones  to  a state  of  subjection.  When  the 
conquest  was  finished,  they  obliged  the  conquered  people 
to  leave  all  the  other  islands  which  form  this  group,  and 
go  to  reside  on  only  two  of  them- — Guam  and  Rota, 
which  placed  them  completely  under  the  observation  of 
their  jealous  invaders,  who  have  managed  ever  since  to 
keep  them  in  a state  of  subjugation,  although  the  spirit 


334 


SOUTH  SEA 


of  revolt  still  lies  dormant  in  their  breasts  ever  ready 
to  burst  forth. 

The  following  day,  after  having  cast  anchor,  wre  began 
to  refit  the  ship,  and  refresh  the  crew,  half  of  whom 
were  allowed  to  be  absent  from  the  ship  alternately  ; so 
that  they  could  enjoy  themselves  upon  the  shore,  and 
carouse  upon  their  own  proper  element,  breathe  its  re- 
freshing airs,  and  taste  of  its  delicious  produce,  to  repair 
their  exhausted  strength  and  rest  their  weary  minds,  so 
as  to  enable  them  to  undertake  with  renewed  ardour  the 
labours  of  the  fisherv,  which  we  intended  to  commence 
again  in  the  beginning  of  May  around  the  Bonin  Islands, 
or  on  the  “ off-shore  ground”  of  Japan. 

Our  sailors,  the  moment  they  stepped  on  shore,  com- 
menced their  enjoyment  with  the  bottle,  if  enjoyment  it 
may  be  called,  for  some  of  them  had  not  touched  the 
land  more  than  a quarter  of  an  hour  before  they  were 
observed  sprawling  on  the  sand  in  a happy  state  of  un- 
consciousness, exposed  to  a broiling  sun,  for  which  they 
had  to  thank  the  “ aquadente,”  the  “ strong  water”  of 
the  Spaniards,  which  they  so  speedily  called  for  and 
obtained  the  moment  their  feet  touched  the  tempting 
shore,  and  which  soon  buried  their  past  dangers,  their 
anxious  thoughts,  their  anticipated  joys,  in  its  oblivious 
shade.  Some  of  us  managed  to  pass  our  time  in  a very 
pleasant  manner,  wandering  to  and  fro  in  search  of  inte- 
resting or  profitable  information,  which  in  those  countries 
is  sure  readily  to  be  obtained. 

The  inhabitants  of  these  islands,  who  are  a kind  of 
Malay-looking  race,  are  very  much  mixed  with  the 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


335 


Spanish,  by  whom,  as  I have  before  stated,  they  are 
governed.  They  behave  in  a moderate,  or  rather  kindly 
manner  to  strangers  ; but  if  offended  they  are  revenge- 
ful to  a sanguinary  degree.  They  all  carry  long,  broad, 
and  thick  swords,  or  more  properly  choppers,  by  their 
sides,  which  they  use  for  clearing  the  small  farms 
that  most  of  them  possess,  and  where  they  princi- 
pally cultivate  the  yam  and  sweet  potato,  these  are 
both  of  very  large  size  and  of  very  fine  quality.  With 
their  swords  or  choppers,  they  frequently  commit  hor- 
rible outrages,  inflicting  in  the  heat  of  quarrel  terri- 
ble wounds  upon  each  other,  or  upon  any  one  who 
may  chance  to  give  them  cause  of  quarrel,  which  at 
times  may  amount  to  a mere  trifle,  I saw  one  poor 
fellow,  who  had  received  in  one  of  these  affrays  no  less 
than  nineteen  deep  and  dangerous  gashes  in  different 
parts  of  his  body  from  one  of  these  weapons— but  he 
had  still  been  fortunate  enough  to  recover  from  them 
all,  because  none  of  the  blows  happened  to  wound  any 
important  part. 

But  the  punishment  which  was  awarded  to  the  mis- 
creant who  inflicted  them,  by  his  judges,  appeared  to 
me  to  be  exceedingly  wise— they  doomed  him  Co  work 
for  his  victim  for  three  days  out  of  every  week  for  the 
space  of  six  years,  which  was  certainly  far  better  than 
incarcerating  the  wretch  within  the  walls  of  a dungeon, 
which  would  not  have  repaid  his  victim  in  the  smallest 
degree  for  the  injuries  he  had  received.  It  was  at  this 
island  that  the  sanguinary  and  cowardly  murder  of 
Captain  Stavers  was  committed,  even  in  the  centre  of 


336 


SOUTH  SEA 


the  town,  and  opposite  the:  governor’s  palace,  as  it  is 
called  ; which  affair  was  certainly  the  most  blood-thirsty 
and  barbarous  that  stains  the  annals  of  any  people. 

Captain  Stavers  was  the  master  of  a whaler,  and  had 
put  into  the  harbour  of  Guam  to  refit  his  ship  and 
refresh  his  crew,— and  had,  a few  days’  previous  to  the 
transaction  which  cost  him  his  life,  held  some  dealings 
with  the  governor,  who  it  appears  acted  in  a very  sinister 
manner  with  some  of  Stavers’  property,  and  had  after- 
wards refused  to  admit  him  into  his  house,  or  give  him 
any  kind  of  redress  whatever.  This  conduct  of  the 
governor  irritated  the  mind  of  the  captain  to  an  un- 
governable extent,  and  he  left  his  ship  for  the  purpose 
of  going  up  to  the  town,  observing  at  the  same  time 
that  he  would  also  go  to  the  palace,  and  oblige  the 
governor  to  give  him  some  kind  «of  satisfaction  for  the 
injuries  and  insults  he  had  repeatedly  received  from 
him. 

In  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day,  the  captain,  who 
was  a most  bold  and  resolute  man,  and  who  was  also 
unfortunately  addicted  to  habits  of  intemperance,  but 
still  possessed  of  many  excellent  and  amiable  traits,  was 
observed  opposite  the  palace  in  a state  of  intoxication, 
armed  with  a brace  of  pistols,  with  which  he  challenged 
the  governor  out  to  fight.  Many  of  the  people  who 
knew  him — for  he  had  often  visited  this  island  before— 
were  well  acquainted  with  his  boisterous  though  harm- 
less nature — they  well  knew  that  his  words  were  “ full 
of  sound  and  fury,  signifying  nothing,”  they  therefore 
eiruYd  at  him  as  they  passed,  and  thought  of  his  con- 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


337 


duct  no  more  than  that  it  was  a mere  petty  brawl 
between  him  and  the  governor ; every  generous  mind 
would  have  felt  the  same  towards  him,  when  all  the  cir- 
cumstances are  considered,  but  in  this  island  there  are 
wretches  who  require  blood  for  an  angry  word,-— and  so 
it  happened  with  Stavers,  who  continued  to  call  upon  his 
cowardly  acquaintance  until  near  sunset,  but  no  one  up 
to  that  time  molested  him  in  the  least,  although  there 
was  a Spanish  guard  near  the  palace — or  more  properly, 
white-washed  barn- — of  eight  or  ten  men,  whom  I believe 
he  also  challenged. 

The  captain,  however,  having  called  for  a long  time 
in  vain,  became  quite  exhausted  from  the  heat  of  the 
sun  and  other  causes,  and  he  therefore  retired  at  last 
into  the  house  of  an  Englishman  who  resided  near  the 
palace ; when  he  had  retired  thither,  he  placed  his 
pistols  upon  a table,  and  seating  himself  began  to  relate 
the  particulars  of  the  transaction  which  had  occurred 
between  himself  and  the  governor.  But  while  in  the 
act  of  so  doing,  it  being  at  the  time  quite  dark,  a man 
entered  the  house  under  the  pretence  of  speaking  to 
Stavers,  when  approaching  close  to  the  table,  he  sud- 
denly seized  the  pistols,  and  retreated  from  the  house 
immediately,  followed  by  the  captain,  who  was  not  the 
kind  of  person  to  brook  conduct  such  as  that  without 
explanation.  But  the  poor  fellow  by  his  precipitation 
only  fell  into  an  ambush  which  had  been  cunningly 
contrived  and  laid  for  him — for  the  moment  he  passed 
over  the  threshold  of  the  house,  in  chase  of  the  man 
who  had  taken  the  pistols,  he  was  assailed  by  nine  or 


a 


838 


SOUTH  SEA 


ten  hired  assassins*  armed  with  various  kinds  of  deadly 
weapons.  But  the  captain,  as  I have  stated  before, 
being  a man  of  most  resolute  mind,  defended  himself  in 
the  most  courageous  manner  against  their  united  arms- 
'll e struggled  against  them,  unarmed  as  he  was,  with 
amazing  strength  and  resolution,  until  he  fell,  covered 
with  wounds  ; between  forty  and  fifty  mortal  injuries 
being  found  afterwards  in  various  parts  of  his  body9 
He  defended  himself  with  his  clenched  hands  against 
their  bayonets,  swords,  and  choppers,  for  his  hands  and 
arms  were  found  shockingly  mutilated,  his  left  arm 
being  cut  to  the  bone  in  many  places,  while  his  chest 
and  abdomen  exhibited  frightful  and  numberless  wounds 
—and  it  is  even  stated,  that  several  of  these  were  in- 
flicted upon  him,  by  these  sanguinary,  but  still  cowardly 
fiends,  as  he  lay  expiring  upon  the  ground.  Thus  was 
the  life  of  a brave  Englishman  wantonly  sacrificed  by  a 
gang  of  hired  wretches,  who  so  unworthily  bore  the 
name  of  men  may  this  recital  act  as  a warning  to  the 
Intemperate. 

I have  heard  that  the  governor,  who  was  a Spaniard, 
was  punished,  in  some  way  or  other,  by  his  own  govern- 
ment at  home,  for  the  part  which  he  took  in  exciting  his 
guard  to  commit  the  horrid  act,  and  it  is  even  said  at 
Guam  to  this  day,  that  he  was  himself  among  them  at 
the  time,  and  prompted  them  on  the  spot ; for  which,  if 
he  did  not  receive  any  punishment  on  his  arrival  in 
Spain,  certain  it  is  that  he  was  deprived  of  the  govern- 
ment of  the  island. 

I have  related  the  particulars  of  this  atrocious  case 


WHALING  VOYAGE* 


because  I am  aware  that  every  whaler  will  feel  excited 
by  its  recital,  more  particularly  those  who  have  heard 
it  spoken  of,  but  who  have  not  had  an  opportunity  of 
witnessing  the  scene  of  the  massacre;  and  I have  re- 
lated the  particulars  as  they  were  related  to  me  in  the 
house  in  which  the  captain  sat,  where  the  pistols  were 
seized,  and  at  a short  distance  from  the  spot  where  the 
tragedy  was  consummated,  and  by  an  Englishman  who 
lived  close  by  at  the  time  of  its  enactment. 

While  I remained  in  this  island,  I saw  quite  enough 
to  convince  me  that  it  was  not  a place  for  an  Englishman 
to  commit  any  act  of  insult  or  imprudence  ; the  passions 
of  the  inhabitants  were  raised  to  a deadly  height  in  an 
instant,— when  “ their  hands  were  readier  for  the  knife 
than  their  tongues  for  words  of  anger,’5 

The  oranges  which  grow  at  this  place  in  vast  abun- 
dance, are  of  the  finest  kind  I ever  saw,  their  flavour  is 
exquisite,  while  they  are  also  of  large  size  and  filled 
with  juice.  They  have  also  growing  here  in  large  quan- 
tities, lemons,  tamarinds,  citrons,  papaw  apples,  with 
cocoa-nuts,  all  of  them  of  the  finest  quality.  Persons, 
who  are  called  by  the  English  sailors  “ toddy- cutters, 
are  employed  by  the  inhabitants  of  this  place  for  ob- 
taining the  juice  of  the  cocoa-nut  tree,  which  is  drank  in 
large  quantities  by  our  seamen,  who  find  it  a very  agree- 
able and  wholesome  beverage,  and  which  is,  I have  no 
doubt,  one  of  the  very  best  restorative  drinks  that  can 
be  made  use  of,  when  the  system  has  become  injured 
by  long  abstinence  from  vegetables  during  a sea- voyage, 
and  by  the  use  of  salted  meat. 


840 


SOUTH  SEA 


The  “ toddy-cutter journeys  to  the  cocoa-nut  grove 
in  the  shade  of  the  evening,  and  after  having  ascended 
to  the  top  of  one  of  the  trees,  by  notches  which  are  cut 
in  its  bark,  forming  steps,  with  a sharp  knife  he  cuts  off 
the  end  of  the  fructifying  bud  that  projects  from  the 
head  of  the  tree,  and  which,  if  left  uninjured,  produces 
the  flower  and  the  fruit  of  the  cocoa-nut.  He  then 
places  under  the  wounded  part  a long  empty  bamboo, 
which  being  left  until  the  dawn  of  the  morning,  the 
toddy -cutter  again  pays  his  visit  and  carries  off  his  bam- 
boo, well  filled  with  the  delicious  juice  which  exudes 
from  the  wounded  bud.  It  is  then  sold  to  any  one  who 
chooses  to  purchase  ; and  it  is  much  used  by  the  in- 
habitants themselves,  who  obtain  from  it  the  ardent 
spirit,  called  by  them  aquadente,  which  they  procure  by 
distillation,  after  the  juice  has  been  fermented. 

The  toddy-cutter  is  much  sought  after  by  the  English 
sailor,  who  watches  his  whereabout  with  unceasing  care, 
while  the  toddy-man,  after  having  freed  his  juice  from 
the  musquitos,  which,  having  sipped  the  intoxicating 
liquor  from  the  bamboo  during  the  night,  falling  into 
it  in  considerable  numbers,  find  a premature  and  in- 
temperate death,  offers  his  cocoa-nut  shell  well  filled  to 
Jack,  who,  like  the  intemperate  musquito,  quaffs  draught 
after  draught,  until  he  finds  his  understanding  giving 
way,  and  if  it  were  possible  would  fall  into  the  same 
snare. 

The  inhabitants  of  this  island,  as  with  all  others  who 
are  brutal,  ungenerous,  and  cowardly,  delight  in  the 
cruel  exhibition  of  cock-fighting,  and  to  which  they  are 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


341 


attached  with  remarkable  partiality.  They  are  not  satis- 
fied with  seeing  the  stupidly  courageous  animals  which 
they  provoke  to  combat  tear  each  other  with  the  wea- 
pons with  which  nature  has  presented  them  for  self- 
defence,  but  they  actually  fasten  to  their  spurs,  sharpened 
blades  of  penknives,  curved  with  the  points  upwards, 
the  cutting  edge  also  being  in  that  direction.  Armed 
with  these  destructive  instruments,  of  course  the  combats 
of  the  unfortunate  birds  are  not  of  long  duration,  both 
being  frequently  killed  at  the  first  onset,  or,  at  most, 
rarely  making  more  than  three  or  four  flies  before  one  or 
the  other  is  destroyed.  This  exhibition  takes  place  too 
on  every  Sunday,  when,  at  a particular  time,  the  arena 
which  is  situated  nearly  in  the  centre  of  the  town,  is 
filled  and  surrounded  by  the  inhabitants,  who  enter  into 
the  sport  with  great  animation,  betting  to  a considerable 
amount  among  themselves  upon  the  relative  merits  of 
the  large  and  powerful  Malay  fowls  which  may  be  pitted 
against  each  other.  The  table  upon  which  the  bets  are 
deposited  is  situated  within  the  arena,  under  the  care 
and  control  of  a person  who  is  employed  for  that  pur- 
pose, and  this  table  is  frequently  covered  with  Spanish 
money.  Before  the  combat  commences,  every  person 
who  can  muster  a rial  manages  to  procure  a rival,  and 
the  birds  being  placed,  the  issue  of  the  combat,  as 
I have  stated,  is  speedily  told : an  immediate  rush  of 
the  fortunate  gamesters  then  takes  place  towards  the 
table,  to  accept  their  ill-gotten  gains  from  the  hands  of 
the  person  qualified  to  distribute  the  cash,  who  appor- 
tions the  proper  sums  to  those  who  have  a right  to  re- 


342 


SOUTH  SEA 


ceive  them,  and  the  same  routine  of  business  or  pleasure 
occurs  again  in  a few  minutes,  and  is  thus  continued  for 
hours.  The  moment  the  birds  are  produced,  every 
person  who  wishes  to  bet  calls  aloud  for  any  one  to 
accept  his  offer,— some  running  round  the  arena,  others 
thrusting  themselves  through  the  crowd  to  obtain  a 
more  favourable  view  of  the  combatants  before  he  stakes 
his  money,  shewing  as  much  anxiety  in  his  countenance 
as  if  the  fate  of  nations  depended  on  the  issue  of  the 
combat.  At  the  same  time,  in  some  other  part  of  the 
arena,  another  may  be  seen  who  has  staked  largely,  livid 
with  agitation,  watching  each  movement  of  the  birds 
when  they  are  about  to  make  the  onset  with  the  greatest 
possible  perturbation ; and  when  on  the  first  rush  the 
secret  is  discovered,  by  his  favourite  combatant  becoming 
deeply  and  mortally  wounded  with  the  curved  knife  of 
his  more  fortunate  adversary,  he  is  seen  almost  to  sink 
to  the  earth,— his  dark  eyes  at  the  same  time  glaring 
around  with  a despairing  motion ; the  next  moment  he 
is  observed  close  by  the  side  of  his  wmunded  favourite, 
and  he  seizes  the  unfortunate  bird,  and  vainly  endea- 
vours to  support  it  for  another  attack,  which  might  in 
turn  be  fatal  to  his  antagonist,  but  the  sanguinary 
monster  with  increased  emotion  perceives  its  life-blood 
trickling  upon  the  sand,  its  valiant  neck  gradually  loses 
its  arch-like  form,  and  it  falls  dead  from  the  hands  of 
its  supporter,  who  with  agitated  breast,  with  muttering 
and  faltering  voice,  trembling  limbs,  and  subdued  spirit, 
slowly  withdraws  from  the  brutal  scene  cowardly  and 
conquered. 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


343 


We  had  managed  to  spend  our  time  agreeably  enough 
during  the  few  days  we  had  as  yet  remained  at  this  place, 
and  I have  no  doubt  we  should  have  continued  to  do  so, 
had  not  a most  unfortunate  and  serious  accident  befallen 
our  second  mate,  which  threw  us  ail  into  the  greatest 
discomfiture  and  melancholy  : it  occurred  to  him  while 
discharging  a cannon  by  the  captain’s  orders,  for  the 
purpose  of  foolishly  saluting  an  American  ship,  which 
was  about  leaving  the  harbour.  The  poor  fellow  had 
discharged  it  several  times,  but  the  reports  were  not 
sufficiently  loud  to  please  the  captain,  who  ordered  it  to 
be  again  loaded  and  fired,  which  the  mate  thought  he 
would  do  this  time  with  effect,  and  therefore  not  only 
did  he  cram  into  its  mouth  a seaman’s  capful  of  powder, 
but  commenced  ramming  down  the  wadding  with  a 
handspike,  which,  as  he  was  doing,  a spark  that  had 
remained  in  the  breech  of  the  gun  from  the  previous 
firing  ignited  the  charge,  and  the  explosion  which  took 
place  shattered  his  right  arm  to  atoms.  Of  course 
the  consternation  which  occurred  among  us  all,  from 
this  melancholy  affair,  was  not  of  a trifling  description, 
and  when  the  captain  saw  the  mischief  his  imprudence 
had  occasioned,  he  wrung  his  hands,  and  shed  tears 
like  a child.  It  was  my  painful  duty  to  amputate  the 
wounded  member,  which  I am  proud  to  have  to  state 
was  accomplished  with  celerity,  and  without  giving  un- 
necessary pangs  to  my  unfortunate  shipmate,  who  soon 
recovered,  and  still  lives  to  tell  the  melancholy  tale. 
By  this  unfortunate  catastrophe  our  mate  lost  his  best 
friend,  his  right  arm,  and  we  lost  a valuable  officer  in  a 


844 


SOUTH  SEA 


distant  part  of  the  world,  at  which  his  equal  was  not  to 
be  found,  just  at  the  time  too  when  we  were  about  to 
commence  our  Japan  season. 

But  other  affairs  of  a more  serious  nature  to  the  suc- 
cess of  the  voyage  now  began  to  manifest  themselves. 
The  crew  were  becoming  much  dissatisfied  with  the 
continued  tyrannical  conduct  of  our  captain,  who  ap- 
peared to  think  that  abuse  and  ill-usage  were  the  best 
return  he  could  make  for  their  toil  and  excellent  conduct. 
Our  first  mate  also  determined  to  leave  the  ship  at  this 
place,  disgusted  by  the  abuse  and  insults  he  had  so  fre- 
quently received  from  the  same  quarter  during  the 
voyage. 

And  while  I was  remaining  at  the  town,  in  close  at- 
tendance upon  the  second  mate,  who  had  been  removed 
from  the  ship  after  the  accident,  an  order  arrived  at  mid- 
night, requesting  my  immediate  attention  on  board,  in 
consequence  of  the  captain  having  received  a severe 
wound  on  his  head,  in  an  affray  in  which  he  had  been 
engaged  with  a party  of  men  who  had  requested  per- 
mission to  go  on  board  his  ship  to  see  some  of  their  old 
messmates.  But  although  this  request  of  theirs  was 
usual  and  moderate  enough,  it  being  in  the  evening  and 
after  working  hours,  the  men  also  who  requested  per- 
mission of  him  being  employed  by  the  same  owner,  two 
of  whose  ships  happening  to  lie  in  the  harbour  of  Guam 
at  the  same  time,— still  our  obdurate  and  tyrannical 
captain  would  not  allow  them  to  come  on  board,  and  a 
few  angry  words  having  ensued  between  them,  he  made 
an  attack  upon  them  with  a stick,  as  they  stood  outside 


/ 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


045 


the  bulwark  of  the  ship,  which  provoked  them  to  such 
an  extent  that  they  all  jumped  over  upon  the  deck,  and 
returned  the  attack  with  compound  interest,  leaving  him 
prostrate,  calling  aloud  for  help  and  mercy. 

The  next  morning,  the  six  men  who  had  been  engaged 
in  the  attack  upon  the  captain,  were  taken  out  of  the 
ship  to  which  they  belonged,  and  sent  to  the  town  as 
prisoners,  escorted  by  a guard  of  soldiers,  by  order  of 
the  Spanish  governor,  who  also  a day  or  two  afterwards 
caused  them  to  be  severely  flogged,  giving  them  thirty 
lashes  each ; and  had  it  not  been  through  my  urgent 
interposition  with  him,  these  unfortunate  men  w^ould 
have  been  tortured  with  sixty  lashes  each, —inflicted  too 
by  the  hands  of  one  of  those  half  Spanish,  half  Malay 
wretches,  who  enjoy  the  employment  of  lacerating  the 
backs  of  these,  I may  say,  innocent  Englishmen ; who, 
after  they  had  received  their  degrading  punishment,  were 
allowed  to  return  to  the  ship  from  which  they  had  been 
taken.  But  when  they  arrived  on  board,  their  old  ship- 
mates could  scarcely  believe  them  to  be  the  same  men 
who  only  a few  days  before  had  been  taken  away  by  the 
guard,  so  depressed  were  they  in  spirit,  and  so  dissatisfied 
were  they  with  everything  around,  feeling  as  they  said, 
66  for  ever  disgraced;”  and  to  such  an  extent  did  the 
punishment  which  they  had  received  work  upon  their 
minds,  that  not  only  were  they  almost  useless  during  the 
remainder  of  the  voyage,  but  the  other  portion  of  the 
crew  became  dissatisfied  in  consequence  of  the  disgrace- 
ful punishment  which  their  shipmates  had  received ; 
charging  their  captain  with  neglect  in  not  refusing  to 

q 2 


346 


SOUTH  SEA 


give  them  up  to  the  guard,  or  in  suffering  them  to  be 
flogged  at  all,  particularly  in  a foreign  country,  where 
their  cause  was  not  likely  to  be  fairly  heard. 

The  consequences  of  these  things  were,  that  the  crew 
neglected,  or  became  careless  of  the  best  interests  of  the 
voyage,  so  that  the  ship,  after  having  been  out  her  full 
time,  returned  to  England  with  scarcely  two -thirds  of 
a cargo,  which  unfortunate  event  may  be  mainly  attri- 
buted to  the  misconduct  and  tyranny  of  one  man,  the 
captain  of  our  ship,  who  first  abused,  and  then  assailed, 
and  even  caused  to  be  flogged,  six  of  his  own  country- 
men, whose  only  crime  was  that  they  desired  to  see 
their  old  friends  whom  they  had  so  accidentally  met  in 
that  distant  part  of  the  world,  as  I have  before  stated. 
Affairs  were  also  getting  into  a very  disturbed  state  on 
board  our  own  ship,  in  consequence  of  the  captain’s 
violent  and  intemperate  conduct  to  the  men.  Our  first 
mate  had  left  the  ship,  our  second  mate  had  lost  his 
arm,  and  by  this  time  several  of  our  best  seamen  had 
also  deserted,  so  that  we  who  remained  had  but  a poor 
prospect  of  success  in  our  forthcoming  Japan  whaling 
season ; the  hope,  however,  of  better  things  in  some 
degree  sustained  our  spirits.  On  the  6th  of  April  1832, 
having  procured  a quantity  of  yams  and  other  refresh- 
ments from  the  shore,  and  also  having  shipped  the,  best 
seaman  we  could  find  to  fill  the  berth  of  our  first  mate, 
we  set  sail  from  this  place  at  which  we  had  been  so 
unfortunate;  and,  as  we  passed  to  the  northward,  we 
enjoyed  a fine  view  of  all  the  other  islands,  which  form 
the  group  of  the  Ladrones,  On  the  7th,  we  were  off 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


347 


Rota,  whence  we  procured  a few  fowls,  some  eggs,  and  a 
large  quantity  of  oranges  ; and  leaving  it  on  the  8th, 
on  the  9th,  at  day-break,  we  had  Sypang,  Tinian  and 
Aquigan  in  sight,  all  of  them  consisting  of  high,  rocky, 
and  bold-looking  land:  Tinian  and  Rota  being  the 
lowest,  the  two  last  with  Guam  also  being  the  best  for 
cultivation  of  the  whole  group.  At  sunset  on  the  same 
day  we  saw  Farallon  bearing  east,  distant  about  fifteen 
miles.  On  the  following  morning  we  found  ourselves 
abreast  of  Anatagan  and  Sarignan ; and  at  about  an 
hour  before  sunset  we  had  Alamagan  and  Gugnan  in 
sight,  all  appearing  very  high  and  conical  in  shape. 


848 


SOUTH  SEA 


CHAPTER  X 


Having  taken  our  farewell  view  of  the  Ladrone  Islands, 
we  still  continued  our  course  to  the  northward  without 
anything  remarkable  occurring,  except  that  on  the  even- 
ing of  the  15th  of  April,  being  in  the  latitude  of  24°  17' 
north,  and  near  the  Sulphur  Islands,  sailing  at  the  same 
time  nearly  before  the  wind,  we  were  overtaken  by  a vio- 
lent squall,  which  carried  away  every  sail  that  we  had 
bent.  In  fact,  it  was  the  blast  of  a terrific  hurricane  to 
which  this  part  of  the  world  is  very  subject,  but  which 
only  continued  for  about  half  an  hour ; and  it  was  a 
fortunate  thing  for  us  that  it  was  not  of  longer  duration* 
as  it  is  impossible  to  say  where  we  might  have  run  to  ; for 
we  scudded  before  it  at  a frightful  rate  under  bare  poles, 
with  our  masts  creaking  as  if  going  by  the  board  every 
moment,  and  with  a few  fragments  of  the  sails  flapping 
about  the  rigging  with  awful  force,  which  it  was  im- 
possible to  secure  until  the  violence  of  the  wind  had 
subsided.  And  moreover,  the  thought  which  alarmed 
us  more  than  any  other  was,  that  we  were  running 
directly  towards  land,  which  was  not  far  distant,  for  we 
were  not  certain  that  we  had  passed  the  Sulphur  Islands, 
although  we  were  well  aware  that  we  were  near  them  ; 
and  even  if  we  had  passed  them,  we  knew  that  the 
Bonins  were  directly  in  our  front,  so  that  we  were 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


349 


all  afraid  of  running  upon  them  in  the  utter  dark- 
ness which  prevailed  during  the  violence  of  the  storm. 
But  even  if  it  had  been  light,  and  we  had  been  so 
situated,  with  land  in  our  front,  I doubt  very  much 
whether  we  could  have  escaped  the  imminent  danger  of 
shipwreck,  as  it  was  impossible  to  steer  the  ship  in 
any  other  course  than  directly  before  the  wind.  For 
even  if  the  ship  “ yawed  ” in  the  steering  one  or  two 
points  against  it,  it  appeared  to  increase  with  tenfold 
violence,  and  such  was  the  horrid  howling  of  the  wind, 
the  roaring  of  the  waters,  the  clashing  of  the  “back- 
stays/’ creaking  of  the  masts,  and  flapping  of  the  torn 
fragments  of  the  sails,  that  it  appeared  as  if  the  demon 
of  the  storm  was  about  to  overwhelm  and  utterly  de- 
molish us  with  all  his  wrath. 

On  the  21st  of  April,  we  again  made  the  Bonin 
Islands,  and  on  my  first  visit  to  the  shore  I busied 
myself  in  clearing  a small  space  of  land  on  the  left  of 
the  large  bay,  which  is  situated  on  the  south-west  por- 
tion of  South  Island,  for  the  purpose  of  planting  some 
cocoa-nuts,  yams,  and  bananas,  wrhich  we  had  brought 
with  us  from  Guam.  I afterwards  engraved  my  name  in 
the  bark  of  a large  tamana  tree  which  grew  by  the  side 
of  my  plantation,  as  a frail  memento  of  my  visit. 

On  our  first  arrival  at  the  termination  of  this  bay,  we 
saw  no  less  than  upwards  of  a hundred  large  green 
turtle  of  the  finest  quality,  lying  upon  the  white  sandy 
shore  basking  in  the  sun.  Approaching  the  beach 
upon  which  they  were  lying,  in  the  most  cautious  man- 
ner, wre  began  turning  them  over  upon  their  backs  with 


350 


SOUTH  SEA 


the  utmost  promptitude,  some  of  them  requiring  three 
of  us  to  do  so,  and  at  the  same  time  exhausting  all 
our  strength,  their  weight  exceeding  two  hundred 
pounds.  When  we  had  succeeded  in  turning  about 
twenty  of  the  largest,  the  others  became  alarmed,  and 
a scrambling  race  took  place  among  the  whole  of  them 
to  gain  the  water;  in  doing  so  they  threw  up  the  sand 
upon  which  they  lay  with  their  fins  with  great  force, 
and  when  they  got  to  the  edge  of  the  bay  in  shallow 
water,  those  we  captured  in  that  situation  gave  us 
some  trouble.  This  was  especially  the  case  with  the 
last  that  we  endeavoured  to  obtain,  one  of  exceeding 
large  size ; for  as  it  had  gained  a sufficient  depth  of 
water  nearly  to  cover  its  shell,  it  was  just  on  the  point 
of  darting  off  with  great  velocity,  when  at  that  moment 
one  of  our  men  endeavoured  to  stop  its  career,  but  was 
directly  thrown  down  by  the  violence  of  its  action  ; how- 
ever, three  more  of  us  immediately  ran  to  the  spot  and 
assisted  in  the  capture,  when  a ludicrous  scene  pre- 
sented itself. 

The  turtle  having  got  into  deeper  water,  was  exerting 
itself  with  all  its  strength  to  escape  from  our  grasp,  and 
in  doing  so  two  of  us  were  thrown  backwards  into  the 
water,  with  our  antagonist  on  the  top  of  us  ; our  friends, 
on  the  other  side,  exerted  themselves  to  their  utmost  to 
relieve  us  from  our  unpleasant  situation,  with  just  our 
heads  appearing  above  the  surface  of  the  sea,  and  during 
this  time  our  obstinate  adversary  kept  moving  its  four 
fins  with  the  greatest  velocity  and  force,  dashing  the 
salt  water  in  our  faces,  almost  blinding  us,  and  at  the 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


351 


same  time  affording  every  now  and  then  some  very 
awkward  thumps  with  its  flippers.  We  could  not  for- 
bear, when  we  thought  of  our  strange  rencontre,  break- 
ing out  into  an  immoderate  fit  of  laughter,  which  had 
the  effect  of  decreasing  our  strength  and  destroying  our 
vigilance,  so  that  the  turtle  at  this  moment  making 
another  violent  struggle,  broke  from  our  hold  and  es- 
caped, leaving  us  covered  with  sand  and  drenched  with 
water.  However,  when  we  returned  to  the  shore,  we 
found  that  we  had  secured  above  forty  of  the  finest,  so 
that  we  had  no  reason  to  regret  the  loss  of  the  one  that 
had  escaped. 

After  having  placed  two  of  the  largest  in  our  boat, 
we  set  about  returning  to  the  ship,  leaving  the  others 
secure  on  the  beach.  But  while  we  were  passing  through 
the  bay,  we  observed  an  immense  number  of  large 
sharks  and  dog-fish,  with  enormous  sting- rays,  or  “ devil 
Ash,”  which  last  are  formed  very  similar  to  the  common 
fish  known  by  the  name  of  skate,  only  much  larger, 
being  from  five  to  six  feet  across,  the  posterior  angle  of 
their  flat  bodies  ending  in  a long  tail,  which  gives  them 
a remarkable  appearance.  These  curious  fish  were  very 
shy,  for  the  moment  they  saw  the  boat  they  set  off 
in  a great  flurry  out  to  sea,  using  their  immense  flaps 
through  the  shallow  water,  as  a bird  uses  its  wings, 
leaving  a “ wake”  after  them  like  a steam-boat.  But  as 
for  **  Master  John  Shark,”  as  the  sailors  sometimes  term 
them,  they  were  not  to  be  intimidated  in  the  least  by  our 
appearance,  in  fact  they  frequently  came  close  to  our 
boat  without  evincing  the  slightest  concern.  The  dog- 


352 


SOUTH  SEA 


fish  also  expressed  the  same  unwillingness  to  be  dis- 
turbed or  alarmed,  appearing  to  be  quite  occupied  by 
their  anticipation  of  the  rich  harvest  which  awaited 
them  in  the  feast  of  young  turtle  to  which  they  were 
hourly  looking.  For  we  found  on  the  beach  I have 
before  mentioned,  several  large  holes  dug  in  the  sand, 
which  had  been  prepared  by  some  of  the  turtle  to 
deposit  their  eggs  in ; after  having  done  so,  the  'sand 
is  again  removed,  and  carefully  placed  over  them,  they 
are  then  left  to  be  hatched  by  the  heat  of  the  sun. 

As  it  was  the  hatching  season  at  the  time  of  our 
arrival  here,  all  these  sharks,  sting-rays,  and  dog-fish, 
were  waiting  at  the  edge  of  the  bay,  to  devour  the 
newly-hatched  turtle  as  they  made  their  first  entrance 
into  the  water,  which  they  do  as  soon  as  they  can  re- 
lieve themselves  from  the  sand  with  which  they  are 
covered ; so  that,  considering  the  number  of  sharks, 
devil-fish,  and  dog-fish,  which  we  saw  in  the  bay,  and 
knowing  well  their  gluttonous  propensities,  it  was  asto- 
nishing to  me  how  it  was  possible  for  a single  young 
turtle  to  escape.  All  the  next  day  we  were  well  em- 
ployed in  getting  on  board  the  remaining  turtle  we  had 
left  on  the  beach  on  the  preceding  day,  and  by  night-fall 
we  had  finished  our  task. 

For  the  space  of  four  or  five  weeks  afterwards  we 
lived  in  excellent  style,  our  dinners  surpassing  a civic 
banquet  in  the  quantity  and  quality  of  our  turtle-soup, 
our  black  cook  thinking  very  little  of  fifty  or  sixty 
pounds  of  their  flesh,  with  its  “ green  fat”  and  “calapee,” 
for  the  preparation  of  his  dinner — which  dainty  fare  con- 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


353 


tinning  so  long,  we  became  quite  aldermanic  in  our 
appearance,  and  even  our  dogs  and  cats,  which  fed  upon 
the  waste  morsels,  soon  became  remarkably  corpulent, 
seeming  also  to  get  quite  idle,  and  excessively  stupid, 
verifying  the  words  of  our  great  poet,  who  states  that 
“fat  paunches  make  lean  pates,  and  dainty  bits  serve  to 
banter  out  the  wits/’  Having  touched  at  North  Island, 
we  visited  the  grave  of  Captain  Younger,  who  was 
killed  by  the  falling  of  a tree  while  on  this  island,  which 
misfortune  was  quickly  followed  by  the  total  wreck  of 
his  ship,  on  the  rocks  not  far  distant  from  the  spot  at 
which,  only  a few  days  before,  he  had  been  interred. 
While  there,  three  of  us  entered  into  the  spirit  of  a 
wild-pig  hunt,  which  was  amusing  and  romantic  enough 
in  these  desolate  regions:  many  daring  and  curious  feats 
were  performed  on  that  day,  the  particulars  of  which 
would  fill  a chapter,  but  I can  only  state  that  we  cap- 
tured three  fine  boars.  We  now  began  cruising  about 
these  islands  for  whales,  but  met  with  very  trifling  suc- 
cess, and  finding  that  it  was  not  likely  to  be  improved 
on  account  of  having  lost  our  two  best  whalers,  and  also 
finding  that  the  captain  still  continued  his  ill-treatment 
of  the  crew,  which  had  been  the  principal  cause  of  our 
misfortunes,  I could  not  help  turning  from  the  scene 
with  disgust,  and  a strong  desire  to  return  home  sprang 
suddenly  up  in  my  mind,  which  I could  not  control, 
and  which  I certainly  had  no  inducement  to  repress,  for 
the  captain  had  by  this  time  estranged  from  him  every 
soul  in  the  ship,  by  his  cruel  and  tyrannical  conduct. 
This  being  the  first  and  last  voyage  I had  ever  under- 


354 


SOUTH  SEA 


taken,  the  very  enjoyments  of  the  sailors  at  times  ap- 
peared  to  me  to  be  sufferings,  when  I compared  London 
associations  with  things  which  take  place  upon  the  great 
sea.  But  when  I saw  thirty- two  good,  industrious,  and 
harmless,  though  brave  men,  abused  and  browbeaten  to 
a most  shameful  extent,  by  a mean  and  contemptible 
tyrant,  while  at  the  same  time  they  were  exerting  them- 
selves to  their  utmost  for  the  success  of  the  voyage, 
which  he  had  himself  frequently  neglected  to  do,  I 
turned  from  the  scene  with  horror,  and  plainly  intimated 
that  I could  no  longer  endure  the  sight. 

Can  we  wonder  at  some  of  our  men  deserting  us  ? I 
have  heard  of  seamen  escaping  from  ships  which  have 
been  tyrannically  governed,  although  they  have  been 
twenty  miles  from  land,  merely  using  a piece  of  bamboo 
to  assist  them  to  swim  on  shore;  others  in  their  despair 
have  thrown  themselves  among  savages.  They  have  pre- 
cipitated themselves  into  the  sea!  they  have  at  times 
turned  against  their  inhuman  task-masters— they  have 
mutinied— they  have  destroyed  their  oppressor  in  some 
instances,  in  consequence  of  the  ill-treatment  they 
have  received  and  endured,  until  the  passions  in  their 
vehement  reaction  could  no  longer  be  shackled  or  kept 
down. 

Such  was  the  captain’s  conduct  that  I now  made  up 
my  mind  to  seize  the  first  opportunity  of  leaving  him 
to  his  fate  the  moment  I could  find  it  convenient, 
whether  advantageous  or  not  to  myself,  and  on  the  first 
of  June  1832,  being  still  off  the  Bonin  Islands,  we  had 
the  good  fortune  to  fall  in  with  the  Sarah  and  Elizabeth 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


355 


of  London,  Captain  Swain,  which  belonged  to  the  same 
owner  as  the  ship  I was  then  in.  When  I informed 
Captain  Swain  of  my  desire  to  return  home,  he  in  the 
most  handsome  manner  offered  me  a passage  in  his 
ship,  for  which  kind  offer,  under  all  the  circumstances 
with  which  we  were  then  surrounded,  I shall  never 
cease  to  feel  grateful.  On  the  same  day  that  I have 
just  mentioned,  I exchanged  berths  with  Mr.  Hildyard, 
who  happened  to  be  surgeon  of  the  Sarah  and  Elizabeth, 
and  with  whom  I had  been  acquainted  in  London,  he 
having  studied  at  the  same  medical  school  in  which  I 
was  also  engaged.  He  entered  the  berth  I had  left  by 
his  own  urgent  desire,  but  much  against  my  wishes 
and  best  advice,  and  which  afterwards  he  had  much 
reason  to  regret.  But  fate  appeared  to  order  the  ex- 
change, which  was  greatly  to  my  advantage,  and  at 
midnight,  it  being  calm  and  convenient,  I was  conveyed 
to  the  Sarah  and  Elizabeth  with  the  whale-boat  that  I 
was  in  so  completely  filled  with  curiosities  and  shells 
that  the  oars  could  not  be  used,  so  that  the  men  were 
obliged  to  make  use  of  paddles  instead. 

On  the  dark  ocean,  at  midnight,  I took  my  last 
farewell  look  of  the  noble  but  ill-fated  ship,  which 
had  carried  me  safely  through  a thousand  dangers. 
We  had  weathered  them  together,  we  had  travelled 
together  at  least  twenty-five  thousand  miles  ! and  now 
in  my  separation  from  her,  the  tear  that  bedimmed  my 
eye  made  me  think  that  she  was  almost  a thing  of  life. 
The  brave  seamen  who  had  sailed  with  me  from  London, 
and  who  were  still  doomed  to  remain  on  board,  saw  me 


356 


SOUTH  SEA 


leave  them  with  regret ; all  of  them  would  have  followed 
me,  but  it  was  impossible  : such  is  the  effect  of  tyranny 
that  they  would  have  abandoned  the  captain  to  his  fate, 
but  they  had  no  door  by  which  to  escape. 

After  I had  left  them,  they  commenced  the  Japan 
fishery,  but  obtained  only  a small  quantity  of  oil ; they 
then  went  to  the  coast  of  California,  and  there  they  met 
with  the  same  ill  success ; the  ship  then  sailed  towards 
the  equinoctial  line,  and  there  they  lost  the  source  of  all 
their  misfortunes— the  captain  died,  and  his  corse  was 
committed  to  the  great  deep,  “ without  a mark,  without 
a bound/" 

The  people  who  remained  on  board  obtained  but  little 
oil  afterwards,  because  they  had  by  this  time  been  out  so 
long  that  provisions  were  getting  scant,  their  rigging 
and  the  ship  also  were  getting  in  a dilapidated  state. 
The  men  who  were  left  on  board,  for  by  this  time  many 
had  forsaken  her,  were  completely  dispirited,  their  con- 
joined cry  was  for  home ! to  which  they  endeavoured 
to  get  as  fast  as  the  condition  of  their  sails  and  cordage 
would  allow  them.  And  after  they  had  put  the  owner 
to  an  enormous  expense,  touching  at  one  place  and 
another  as  they  sailed  along,  finding  it  necessary  to  do 
so,  they  at  length  were  fortunate  enough  to  arrive  at  the 
port  from  whence  they  sailed,  after  an  absence  of  three 
long  years  and  a half,  during  which  time  they  had  only 
procured  one-half  of  an  average  cargo. 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


357 


CHAPTER  XL 


When  I arrived  on  board  the  Sarah  and  Elizabeth,  I 
was  at  once  struck  with  the  different  scene  that  pre- 
sented itself  to  that  which  I had  so  recently  left.  The 
men  were  elastic ; and  merry,  smiling  faces  appeared 
everywhere.  The  captain  firm,  but  yet  humane,  was 
strict  in  discipline,  but  kind  in  heart. 

When  the  busy  scenes  of  the  day  were  over,  the  men 
enjoyed  the  merry  dance  and  song,  to  the  tune  of  some 
amateur  upon  the  fiddle— sounds  which  were  never 
heard  in  the  ship  I had  just  left,  except  once  or  twice 
at  the  commencement  of  the  voyage,  when  a similar 
instrument  was  used,  and  a few  dances  were  produced— 
but  such  was  the  discord,  and  unharmonious  sounds 
which  sprung  up  from  tyranny,  that  the  poor  instrument 
itself  broke  down  from  sheer  melancholy,  and  never 
uttered  another  note  afterwards.  But  although  the 
men  in  the  Sarah  and  Elizabeth  enjoyed  full  freedom, 
still  none  of  them  ever  attempted  to  go  beyond  the 
boundary  of  discretion.  They  were  as  one  family,  toil- 
ing for  one  common  end ; having  laws  which  they  obeyed 
and  liberties  which  they  enjoyed,  with  a president  they 
revered,  because  they  knew  he  was  just!  The  natural 
consequences  were,  that  success  followed  in  the  wake 


358 


SOUTH  SEA 


of  their  united  efforts,  and  still  more  strengthened  the 
buoyancy  of  their  minds.  And  indeed  good  fortune 
attended  us  with  an  unsparing  hand,  for  in  about  six 
weeks  we  obtained  above  six  hundred  barrels  of  sperm 
oil,  which  completed  our  cargo.  Never  shall  I forget 
the  pleasurable  excitement  that  prevailed  among  all 
around,  when  the  last  slain  whale  measured  its  huge 
length  along  the  limpid  waves— cheer  after  cheer  as- 
cended, and  made  the  decks  resound  with  their  recoil. 
The  exciting  grog  was  quaffed  to  dearest  wife  or  maid, 
or  nearest  friend,  with  joyous  heart  and  generous  throb 
of  warmest  hope.  And  when  the  rich  amber-coloured 
store  was  placed  below  in  the  sure  hold,  then  up  ran 
the  busy  mariners,  and  stretched  upon  the  yards  with 
willing  hands  the  whitened  sails,  and  heaved  with  urgent 
hope  for  kindly  gales  to  waft  them  to  their  homes. 

We  now  steered  to  the  north-east,  being  bound  again 
to  the  Sandwich  Islands,  it  being  necessary  to  refit  the 
ship  and  refresh  the  crew,  before  we  attempted  to  pass 
through  the  distant  regions,  or  witness  the  uncommon 
scenes  that  might  present  themselves.  We  soon  found 
ourselves  in  the  latitude  of  forty  degrees  north  of  the 
equator  ; it  being  necessary  to  make  so  much  northing 
in  order  to  get  to  windward  of  the  Sandwich  Islands 
during  our  passage — because  of  the  north-east  trade 
winds  which  prevail  all  around  them,  so  that  if  a ship 
attempted  to  make  the  straight  course,  she  wTould  soon 
find  herself  far  to  leeward  of  the  islands. 

From  the  time  of  completing  our  cargo  up  to  our 
arrival  in  forty  north,  we  had  passed  through  an  immense 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


359 


number  of  large  sperm  whales,  indeed  we  had  seen  them 
almost  every  day.  They  appeared  migrating,  or  going 
off  in  herds  or  “ schools  ” to  the  southward.  At  this 
time  we  were  only  about  three  days  sail  from  the  islands 
which  lie  to  the  southward  of  the  sea  of  Kamschatka, 
which  is  the  longest  passage  a ship  can  possibly  make 
from  England ; and  the  reader  will  find,  if  a chart  or 
map  is  consulted,  that  the  distance  which  then  existed 
between  us  and  our  native  land  was  enormous.  If  the 
fact  of  whale  fishermen  wandering  so  far  in  search  of 
their  prey  was  not  fully  proved  from  various  authentic 
records,  would  not  Europeans  in  general  deem  the  first 
narration  of  such  journeyings,  as  an  account  too  impro- 
bable for  them  to  believe  ? are  works  of  romance  beyond 
the  apparent  fiction  of  their  doings  in  those  distant 
regions ; where,  trusting  to  their  frail  bark,  they  brave 
the  Indian  typhoon,  sail  along  the  shores  of  unfriendly 
and  savage  tribes,  and  at  times  carry  off  the  rich  pro- 
duce of  their  seas  in  sight  of  their  very  habitations  ? 

On  Monday  the  6th  of  August  1832,  at  about  three 
p.m.,  we  again  crossed  the  meridian  of  longitude,  making 
ourselves  180  degrees  of  longitude  distant  from  the 
pleasant  town  of  Greenwich,  finding  our  latitude  also  to 
be  38Q  39'  north  of  the  equator.  On  the  14th,  being 
in  the  longitude  of  168°  37  30;/  west,  and  latitude  35° 
32'  north,  we  fell  in  with  the  regular  north-east  trade 
winds.  During  this  day  we  passed  through  large  quan- 
tities of  medusae,  intermixed  with  great  numbers  of  the 
ianthina  fragilis,  a purple  shell  which  generally  floats  on 
the  surface  of  the  ocean,  about  the  size  of  a walnut ; 


860 


SOUTH  SEA 


the  blood  of  the  animal  that  inhabits  this  shell  is  of  a 
deep  blue  colour,  and  could  be  used  as  ink.  On  the 
following  day  we  again  saw  some  large  sperm  whales, 
which  appeared  to  be  from  their  motions  upon  their 
feeding  ground,  or  located  for  a short  time. 

At  ten  a.m.  on  the  30th,  we  had  the  island  of  Moro- 
toi  in  sight,  one  of  the  Sandwich  Islands.  By  three 
p.m.  we  were  close  in  with  the  west  end  of  Mowee  ; and 
running  close  under  its  shore,  we  passed  through  the 
channel  which  lies  between  it  and  Morotoi,  enjoying 
during  our  passage  through  it  a beautiful  view  of  the 
picturesque  island  of  Mowee,  which  gently  rises  from 
the  ocean  on  this  side,  forming  a regular  ascent  of  even 
land,  until  the  waist  of  the  mountain  is  reached,  when 
a series  of  gullies  or  ravines  present  themselves  in  its 
surface,  but  the  same  angular  ascent  is  kept  until  the 
• peak  loses  itself  in  the  clouds.  Along  the  whole  of  its 
western  margin  we  observed  every  now  and  then  a few 
small  houses,  to  which  were  added  small  plantations  of 
beautiful  trees,  of  a most  refreshing  and  lovely  green, 
that  stood  in  tufts  here  and  there,  altogether  present- 
ing a most  interesting  diversity  of  views.  The  grass 
that  covered  the  greater  part  of  the  slope,  and  which 
was  burnt  of  different  hues  by  the  intense  heat  of  the 
sun,  formed  a pleasing  contrast,  when  compared  with 
the  luxuriant  and  rich  green  verdure  of  the  trees.  At 
six  p.m.  we  cast  anchor  opposite  the  town  of  Mowee, 
which  can  now  boast  of  a very  creditable  church,  in 
which  the  Christian  religion  is  taught.  They  have  also 
a fort  standing  upon  the  edge  of  the  sea,  which  mounts 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


361 


four  guns  for  the  protection  of  the  town.  A few  days 
before  our  arrival,  this  island  had  been  visited  by  the 
American  frigate  Potomac ; we  were  also  informed  of 
the  death  of  the  queen-regent  of  these  islands,  which 
occurred  since  our  last  visit. 

At  seven  f.m.,  Captain  Swain  paid  a visit  to  the 
shore,  but  very  speedily  returned,  having  found,  as  he 
said,  every  thing  so  restrained  by  religious  tyranny  that 
he  had  made  up  his  mind  to  weigh  anchor,  and  make 
sail  for  Oahoo.  At  daybreak  the  following  morning  all 
hands  began  to  <fi  heave  short,”  so  that  at  six  a.m.  we 
were  under  weigh,  and  after  being  a few  hours  becalmed 
under  the  lee  of  the  land,  we  proceeded  between  the 
islands  of  Ranai  and  Morotoi,  with  violent  winds  from 
e.n.e.  ; at  four  p,m.  we  had  Oahoo  plainly  in  sight,  and 
at  six  we  were  at  Diamond-point,  which  is  remarkable 
for  its  rugged  appearance,  it  being  formed  of  various 
craters  of  extinct  volcanoes.  At  eight  p.m.  we  cast 
anchor  in  nineteen  fathoms,  nearly  opposite  the  town, 
having  found  our  way  along  the  coast  in  the  dark  by 
frequently  sounding  with  the  lead.  Immediately  casting 
anchor,  I accompanied  the  captain  to  the  shore,  and 
soon  placed  myself  under  the  hospitable  roof  of  Dr. 
Rooke,  who  received  me  as  he  had  done  before,  with  the 
greatest  kindness  and  cordiality,  for  which  I shall  ever 
be  unable  to  repay  him. 

I had  the  pleasure  of  being  introduced  to  several 
English  gentlemen  who  were  remaining  here  on  business, 
among  whom  I must  beg  leave  to  mention  D.  Finlayson, 
esq.  the  governor  of  a settlement  formed  by  the  Hon. 


362 


SOUTH  SEA 


Hudson’s  Bay  Company  on  the  banks  of  the  Columbia 
River)  on  the  north-west  coast  of  America.  While  the 
governor  remained  at  this  place  he  had  the  gratification 
of  obtaining  the  entire  respect  of  all  classes  of  persons, 
owing  to  the  kind  and  gentlemanly  demeanour  which 
distinguished  him  on  all  occasions. 

It  was  also  while  our  vessel  remained  at  Oahoo,  that 
I had  an  opportunity  of  enjoying  the  society  of  Mr. 
Douglas,  that  well-known,  bold,  and  industrious  tra- 
veller, who,  after  having  passed  through  regions  which 
had  never  before  been  explored  except  by  the  reckless 
savage,— -after  having  escaped  the  scalping-knife  of  the 
dog-ribbed  Indian  in  his  explorations  through  the  wilds 
of  north-west  America,  and  a thousand  other  dangers, 
wras  doomed  to  suffer  one  of  the  most  unfortunate  and 
dreadful  deaths  that  ever  befel  man ; — and  even  too,  at 
one  of  these  islands,  at  which  I saw  him  in  the  full  en- 
joyment of  his  mental  and  corporeal  faculties,  congratu- 
lating himself  upon  the  fact,  that  he  had  passed  through 
the  wildest  regions  of  the  earth  without  injury,  and  that 
he  was  now  making  his  rapid  way  towards  his  native 
country,  having  but  a few  more  duties  to  perform,  and 
with  but  a few  dangers  to  apprehend,  compared  to  those 
which  he  had  already  surmounted. 

He  informed  me  with  his  own  lips  that  he  intended  in 
a short  time  to  commence  his  journey  homewards  through 
Siberia  and  Russia,  wishing,  as  he  stated,  to  inspect  the 
platina  mines,  which  had  just  then  been  discovered  in 
some  parts  of  Siberia.  He  also  stated  that  he  had 
gathered,  in  his  wanderings,  a great  number  of  botani- 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


863 


cal,  anatomical,  and  other  specimens,  principally  from 
the  wilds  of  California  and  other  places  that  are  situated 
in  the  north-west  portion  of  America  ; and  he  seemed 
yearning  for  the  time  when,  on  his  arrival  in  his  native 
land,  he  could  have  poured  out  the  treasures  of  his  ex- 
perienced mind,  of  the  worth  and  abundance  of  which 
no  one  could  doubt.  When  we  imagine  that  we  have 
reached  the  highest  pinnacle  of  happiness,  the  last  step 
appearing  under  our  feet,  a yawning  gulf  sometimes 
opens  itself,  and  encloses  us  in  its  dark  recesses  for 
ever.  So  it  happened  to  the  unfortunate  Douglas,  who, 
having  determined  to  visit  O why hee— already  too  well 
distinguished  as  the  grave  of  the  immortal  Cook— before 
leaving  the  Sandwich  group,  and  while  exploring  the 
beauties  of  nature  which  abound  in  that  romantic  island, 
unfortunately  fell  into  a pit,  which  the  natives  had  dug 
and  covered  over  with  branches  of  trees  for  the  purpose 
of  entrapping  wild  bulls,  herds  of  which  roam  their 
forests,  and  whose  progenitors,  I believe,  were  first 
landed  by  Cook.  But  that  which  forms  the  most  fright- 
ful part  of  the  catastrophe  is  the  fact,  that  one  of  these 
animals  had  been  precipitated  into  the  same  pit  but  a 
short  time  before  the  unfortunate  Douglas  fell  in,  upon 
whom  the  enraged  beast  immediately  made  a most  furious 
attack,  and  gored  him  to  death, — an  event  that  filled  the 
minds  of  his  friends  with  horror,  and  caused  the  world  of 
science  a severe  loss. 


SOUTH  SEA 


CHAPTER  XII. 


On  the  11th  of  September  1832,  we  sailed  out  of  the 
harbour  of  Oahoo,  and  proceeded  to  the  southward, 
sometimes  enjoying  fine  winds  and  pleasant  weather, 
and  at  others  doomed  to  face  the  contrary  winds  or 
pelting  rain.  We  crossed  the  equinox  for  the  fifth  time, 
on  Sunday  September  30th,  in  the  longitude  149°  54f 
15"  west  of  Greenwich,  carrying  all  sail  for  the  Society 
Islands.  The  captain  wishing  to  touch  at  them  for  the 
purpose  of  obtaining  some  refreshments,  to  supply  us 
during  our  homeward  voyage,  which  we  had  still  before 
us,  with  the  dangerous  passage  of  Cape  Horn  to  en- 
counter, the  anticipation  of  which  conveyed  unpleasant 
associations  to  most  of  us. 

Being  on  the  8th  of  October  in  the  latitude  of  15°  58 
south,  and  in  the  longitude  of  150°  28"  west,  we  sailed 
directly  over  the  spot  on  which  an  island  called  “ Fugi- 
tives Island’5  is  marked  upon  the  chart.  We  had  there- 
fore good  reason  for  supposing  that  such  an  island  did 
not  exist. 

On  the  following  day,  “ Otaha,”  one  of  the  Friendly, 
or  Society  Islands  was  in  sight;  soon  after  which  we 
saw  “ Bolabola,”  and  at  ten  p.m.  we  were  close  under 
the  lee  of  “ Ulitea,  ” where  we  lay  all  night  with  our 
headyards  aback.  But  it  was  not  until  the  11th  that  we 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


365 


cast  anchor  in  the  harbour  of  “ Riatea,”  in  twenty-two 
fathoms  water,  into  which  we  were  conducted  by  a native 
pilot,  through  a very  narrow  channel  formed  by  nature 
in  the  reef.  This  harbour  is  one  of  the  finest  in  the 
world,  and  capable  of  containing  above  a thousand  sail, 
which  may  be  all  moored  in  perfect  safety  ; it  is  princi- 
pally formed  by  a reef  which  surrounds  a portion  of  the 
island,  having  two  openings  in  it  by  which  ships  enter 
and  leave  it,  the  foremost  being  open  to  windward,  and 
the  latter  to  leeward.  Directly  we  cast  anchor,  I made 
my  way  to  the  shore,  and  commenced  purchasing  shells  of 
all  that  I could  meet  who  happened  to  have  any  to  dis- 
pose of,  for  which  I gave  in  return  small  pieces  of  calico. 
While  at  the  same  time  the  crew  had  an  opportunity  of 
regaling  themselves  on  board  with  pine-apples,  delicious 
bread-fruit,  and  young  cocoa-nuts,  with  which  they  had 
good  reason  to  be  well  satisfied.  The  natives  of  these 
islands,  like  those  of  most  others  of  the  South  Seas, 
possess  a great  fondness  for  rum,  and  indeed  for  ardent 
spirits  of  every  kind.  But  many  of  them  being  under 
the  control  of  the  missionaries,  they  endeavour,  and  with 
much  success,  to  disguise  their  passion  for  things  of  such 
a nature  from  the  observation  of  these  stern  monitors, 
the  attempt  at  which  often  leads  them  to  make  use  of 
a great  deal  of  artful  dissimulation,  which  the  following 
anecdote  will  exemplify. 

After  I had  been  on  shore  but  a very  short  time,  an 
elderly,  but  fine-looking  chief  called  me  aside,  and 
inquired  in  a gentle  whisper,  in  broken  English,  if  we 
had  any  rum  on  board,  as  he  wished  to  obtain  a bottle 


366 


SOUTH  SEA 


of  it  for  another  person,  who  had  deputed  him  to  apply. 
He  stated  that  he  was  a missionary  himself,  and  conse- 
quently could  not  he  suspected  of  selfish  motives  in 
making  this  request,  hut  he  had  made  the  application  to 
oblige  a particular  friend,  who  had  such  a vehement 
longing  for  a little,  that  he  had  felt  it  impossible  to 
refuse  the  request.  Perceiving  a certain  air  of  secresy 
and  whimsical  slyness  about  the  old  man,  I could  not 
suppress  my  curiosity  to  know  who  it  was  that  desired 
so  urgently  to  taste  the  forbidden ; but  it  was  a consi- 
derable time  before  I could  learn  the  truth,  and  not  until 
I had  positively  refused  to  grant  the  supply  on  other 
terms,  that  the  old  chief  reluctantly  informed  me  that 
it  was  his  sister  who  so  longed  for  some  of  our  old 
Jamaica,  and  who,  as  I was  afterwards  informed  was  no 
less  than  the  queen  herself,  or  some  principal  chieftainess* 
Wishing  to  clear  up  the  mystery  still  further,  I 
inquired  what  she  was  inclined  to  give  me  in  exchange 
were  I to  procure  for  her  the  much  coveted  ram : he 
answered  immediately,  that  his  sister  possessed  some 
very  fine  mats,  which  she  would  present  me  with  in 
exchange ; but  just  as  the  old  gentleman  was  chuckling 
with  delight  in  thinking  that  he  had  succeeded  in  his 
mission,  I suddenly  turned  upon  him  and  told  him  that 
I could  not  deal  with  any  one  but  the  principal  in  such 
an  important  matter,  and  I therefore  desired  him  to  go 
and  inform  his  sister  of  my  determination,  being  well 
aware  that  had  he  obtained  possession  of  the  spirit,  very 
little  in  its  genuine  state  would  have  reached  its  destina- 
tion, and  suspecting  his  duplicity,  I wished  to  torment 
the  old  fellow  a little. 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


367 


In  a short  time  I was  again  beset  by  the  same  old 
chief,  whose  sister  had  determined  to  open  the  negotia- 
tion in  a new  way ; and  she  therefore  sent  her  brother 
with  the  mats  under  his  arm,  thinking  the  sight  of  them, 
for  they  were  really  very  neat  and  pretty,  would  tempt 
me  immediately  to  send  the  rum  to  her ; but  I still  re- 
fused,  and  it  was  not  until  I had  coaxed  the  old  man 
into  a good  humour  that  I succeeded  in  getting  him  to 
shew  me  the  house  in  which  his  sister  and  himself 
resided. 

When  I had  obtained  all  the  information  I desired, 
I went  on  board  the  ship,  and  informed  the  captain  of 
the  bargain,  and  as  I possessed  no  rum  of  my  own,  I 
induced  him  to  accompany  me  to  the  shore,  wishing 
him  to  purchase  the  mats  for  himself.  When  the  even- 
ing arrived  we  went  to  the  beach,  and  found  the  brother 
awaiting  our  arrival,  who  soon  conducted  us  to  the 
house  of  his  sister,  which  when  we  had  entered  he  slyly 
pointed  to  an  elderly  woman  who  was  reclining  on  a 
sort  of  bedstead  covered  with  mats,— and  making  some 
ludicrous  grimaces,  he  intimated  that  it  was  a sly  affair 
altogether,  and  that  he  wished  her  to  bear  the  blame  as 
well  as  himself,  at  the  same  time  appearing  full  of  good 
humour,  half  pleased  and  half  ashamed  of  his  sister’s 
secret  passion.  When  we  mentioned  the  affair  to  her, 
to  our  great  surprise  she  with  great  energy  denied  any 
knowledge  of  such  a request,  and  emphatically  stated 
that  she  had  never  employed  her  brother  upon  such  a 
disgraceful  mission,  and  the  old  lady  appeared  quite 
angry  that  such  an  idea  should  be  entertained  by  us  ; 


368 


SOUTH  SEA 


taking  care  at  the  same  time,  to  say  very  little  to  her 
brother,  fearing  lest  he  might  explain  the  whole  busi- 
ness. Having  noticed  this,  and  having  observed  a 
certain  cunning  twinkling  about  the  old  man’s  eye,  we 
still  felt  that  she  was  only  “ paltering  with  us  in  a double 
sense,”  and  so  we  determined  to  place  the  queen  upon 
the  severest  trial  we  could  devise, — when  seating  our- 
selves and  lighting  our  cigars,  and  calling  her  brother 
to  bring  us  a little  fresh  water,  we  mixed  some  grog, 
and  entered  into  conversation  with  each  other,  watching 
the  motions  of  the  queen  every  time  we  drank  her 
health  from  the  cocoa-nut  shell,  in  which  we  had  mixed 
our  refreshment.  We  had  not  been  seated  more  than 
a few  minutes  before  the  queen’s  brother  thought  proper 
to  come  and  sit  also,  which  he  did  close  by  the  side  of 
the  captain,  every  now  and  then  throwing  a most  search- 
ing look  at  our  two  bottles  which  contained  the  rum0 
It  was  not  long  before  the  captain  invited  him  to  drink, 
when  suddenly  laying  hold  of  the  cocoa-nut  shell,  which 
contained  the  liquor,  as  if  human  endurance  could  exist 
no  longer,  he  applied  the  vessel  to  his  mouth,  drank 
off  in  one  draught  the  whole  of  its  contents,  and  then 
turning  to  his  sister  and  looking  her  full  in  the  face, 
with  an  animated  expression  of  countenance,  he  broke 
out  into  one  of  the  most  immoderate  fits  of  laughter 
that  I ever  recollect  to  have  heard,  to  which  a chorus 
was  formed  by  the  queen  and  ourselves.  Her  majesty 
was  not  long  in  following  the  example  of  her  brother, 
when  the  same  laugh  and  chorus  were  indulged  in  until 
our  two  bottles  were  emptied.  By  the  time  that  her 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


869 


majesty  and  her  royal  brother  had  finished  the  two 
bottles  of  rum,  they  began  to  wax  a little  warm,  and 
thinking  that  it  was  then  our  best  time  to  request  pos- 
session  of  the  mats,  we  did  so,  but  it  was  not  without 
considerable  solicitation  that  we  obtained  them.  When 
soon  afterwards  we  bid  them  adieu,  and  took  our  depar- 
ture for  the  ship,  not  a little  interested  with  our  adven- 
ture, which  demonstrated  to  us  the  love  they  bore  for 
mm,  and  the  cunning  faculties  they  possessed  of  con- 
cealing  their  strong  desires,  at  least  in  ordinary  instances. 
On  the  following  morning  I again  visited  the  shore  and 
saw  the  queen,  who,  directly  she  perceived  me  entering 
her  house,  began  with  uplifted  eyes  and  hands  to  pray 
most  vociferously,  although  at  the  same  time  another 
bottle  of  rum  would  have  been  most  welcome  to  her, 
which  she  at  one  time  appeared  so  religiously  to  despise. 
I however  speedily  bade  this  specimen  of  a savage  reli- 
gious hypocrite  farewell,  for  the  captain  having  found 
that  but  a few  sweet  potatos  could  be  obtained  here, 
determined  to  pay  a visit  to  Bolabola,  an  island  of  the 
same  group,  which  was  in  sight,  and  at  which  we  ex- 
pected to  be  more  fortunate. 

At  eleven  a.m.  we  weighed  anchor,  and  sailed  half 
round  the  island,  through  the  magnificent  harbour  I 
have  before  mentioned,  during  which  time  we  were 
delighted  with  the  richly  picturesque  views  that  every 
moment  presented  themselves.  At  one  time  we  were 
close  under  the  high  and  overhanging  land,  which  ap- 
peared to  be  oppressed  with  the  thick  wood  and  rich 
and  entangled  foliage  with  which  it  is  covered.  In  a 

r 2 


370 


SOUTH  SEA 


few  minutes  a wide  and  beautiful  plain  would  open  itself, 

enriched  with  various  tints  of  verdure,  from  the  “ sear 

and  yellow  leaf,”  to  the  bright  green  of  emerald.  The 

clear  ocean  exposed  its  submarine  beauties  of  shells  and 

many-coloured  corallines,  while  a small  island,  which 

sprung  up  midway  in  our  passage,  appeared  nothing  but 

a combination  of  terrestrial  beauties : the  leafv  inter- 

* 

woven  arbour— the  tangled  dell — the  over-hanging  cliff 
—the  rocky  glen— the  chequered  plain— all  appeared  to 
vie  in  offering  to  the  lover  and  observer  of  nature  their 
choisest  forms,  illuminated  by  the  vivid  light  of  a tro- 
pical sun. 

After  having  passed  through  the  leeward  opening  in 
the  reef,  we  crowded  all  sail  for  the  remarkable  island  of 
Bolabola,  which  appears  in  the  direction  from  which  we 
saw  it  similar  in  form  to  the  head  of  a huge  sperm  whale, 
projecting  at  an  angle  of  forty-five  degrees  from  the 
water : its  centre  is  formed  of  an  oblong  square,  standing 
on  its  end,  in  an  oblique  direction,  at  the  angle  I have 
mentioned,  and  appears  like  the  tower  of  Pisa,  in  the  act 
of  falling. 

Before  sunset  we  had  anchored  in  its  small  harbour, 
when  on  proceeding  to  the  shore  soon  afterwards,  I ac- 
companied the  captain  to  the  king’s  house,  where  we 
were  quickly  surrounded  by  a number  of  men,  many  of 
whom  were  chiefs.  We  were  greatly  surprised  at  their 
enormous  size,  for  not  only  were  they  of  great  bulk,  but 
many  of  them  where,  at  least,  six  feet  four  or  six  inches 
in  height.  Most  of  these  giants  were  intoxicated,  and 
they  entered  the  king’s  house  with  the  utmost  freedom, 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


371 


some,  with  boisterous  mirth,  reeling  towards  us  to  wel- 
come us  to  the  island. 

The  captain  not  liking  the  unruly  appearance  of 
things  soon  went  on  board  the  ship,  while  I remained  at 
the  king’s  house,  which  in  a short  time  became  filled  with 
the  natives  of  the  place,  nearly  all  of  whom  were  much 
excited  from  drinking  a spirit  that  they  have  been 
taught  to  procure  from  the  “ Ti 99  root,  which  grows 
spontaneously  in  Bolabola. 

While  I was  sitting  near  the  king,  upon  a kind  of 
three-legged  stool,  cut  out  of  a solid  block  of  wood  re- 
sembling mahogany,  and  the  top  of  it  being  hollowed 
out  to  form  the  seat,  an  old  but  enormous  chief  came 
reeling  towards  me,  hiccoughing  and  making  so  many 
grotesque  faces  at  the  time  of  his  approach,  that  I could 
not  forbear  laughing  full  in  his  face.  He  however  did  not 
appear  to  notice  my  laughter,  but  taking  another  of  the 
seats  I have  described,  placed  himself  directly  before 
me,  squatting  his  huge  frame,  which  was  nearly  naked, 
upon  the  low  seat,  with  his  elbows  resting  on  his  knees 
and  his  head  upon  his  hands ; in  this  situation  he  set 
his  eyes  directly  upon  me,  much  to  the  amusement  of 
the  company,  who  seemed  to  enjoy  his  drunken  frolick- 
ings.  After  he  had  well  observed  every  feature  in  my 
face,  I soon  changed  the  gay  motions  of  his  huge  features 
by  making  him  understand  that  he  would  not  live  long, 
now  that  he  had  commenced  to  drink  spirit  in  such 
excess.  I told  him  that  I was  going  to  “ Brigatana,” 
(England)  and  that  if  I returned  again  to  Bolabola,  I 
should  not  find  him  alive;  he  would  be  in  the  “rapo,” 


372 


SOUTH  SEA 


(earth),  which,  as  he  knew  I was  a “ cowka  (doctor), 
disconcerted  him  very  much.  Although  our  conversation 
was  carried  on  in  a mixture  of  languages,  we  managed 
to  understand  each  other  pretty  well,  for  the  words  used 
above  belong  more  to  the  Sandwich  Island  than  the 
Bolabola  English. 

By  this  time  I found  myself  encircled  by  as  grim- 
looking  a set  of  beings  as  I had  ever  yet  seen ; those  who 
could  get  the  three-legged  seats  to  make  use  of,  did  so, 
while  those  who  could  not,  squatted  down  upon  the 
ground.  I appeared  a mere  pigmy  to  them  ; even  while 
we  were  sitting,  their  ponderous  heads  rose  above  mine 
considerably,  while  their  broad  chests  and  shoulders 
denoted  enormous  strength.  The  old  chief,  with  whom 
I had  commenced  the  conversation,  and  who  at  his 
first  entrance  into  the  king’s  house  appeared  so  jovial, 
and  whose  huge  and  somewhat  rosy  face  was  glistening 
with  perspiration,  now  lost  all  his  animation  ; his  coun- 
tenance, which  only  a short  time  before  was  full  of 
“ quips  and  cranks  and  wanton  wiles,”  had  now  assumed 
an  amazing  length,  and  he  appeared  overshadowed  with 
gloom  ; when,  rising  with  that  melancholy  appearance 
which  is  sometimes  seen  in  particular  states  of  intoxica- 
tion, he  staggered  slowly  from  the  house,  until  his  giant 
frame  was  lost  to  view  in  the  darkness  of  the  night. 

The  others,  one  by  one,  took  their  departure  soon 
after,  as  it  was  growing  late,  when  I had  a better  oppor- 
tunity of  holding  a little  conversation  with  his  majesty, 
during  which  he  frequently  urged  me  to  leave  the  ship 
and  stay  with  him  ; saying  that  he  would  give  me  a very 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


373 


fine  house  with  provisions,  and  plenty  of  people  to 
attend  upon  me;  but  the  offers  and  the  eloquence  of  the 
poor  king  were  entirely  thrown  away,  and  when  he  found 
the  “cowka”  wanted  a good  salary  in  dollars,  which  he 
knew  he  had  not  to  give,  he  gave  a deep  sigh,  a shake 
of  the  head,  and  a shrug  of  the  shoulders,  and  said 
little  more  afterwards.  In  a short  time  he  inquired 
if  I wished  to  go  to  rest,  when  answering  in  the  affir- 
mative, he  shewed  me  to  a corner  of  his  house  where  a 
few  mats  had  been  placed  upon  the  ground  that  were 
to  serve  me  for  my  bed,  when  looking  round  through  the 
darkness,  which  was  only  broken  by  a small  light  that 
burnt  in  a cocoa-nut  shell  containing  oil,  I saw  a number 
of  people  lying  about  in  different  quarters  asleep.  1 soon 
threw  myself  upon  the  humble  resting-place  that  had 
been  prepared  for  me  ; which  the  king  seeing,  he  took  his 
departure  for  his,  situated  at  a little  distance  from  mine, 
having  a “ taipa  ” or  native  cloth  hung  around  it,  encom- 
passing also  the  queen  or  lady  of  his  choice.  As  I had 
heard  previous  to  our  arrival,  that  the  natives  of  these 
islands  were  in  a very  improved  condition  when  com- 
pared to  what  they  formerly  were  before  the  arrival  of 
the  missionaries  among  them,  I was  much  disappointed 
when  I perceived  so  many  of  them  intoxicated,  and  all 
of  them  in  such  an  unruly  or  ungovernable  state  ; and 
although  I could  scarcely  believe  for  an  instant  that 
they  would  attempt  to  injure  me  in  the  slightest  degree, 
still  sleep  did  not  relieve  me  from  the  various  cogitations 
which  continued  to  press  upon  my  mind  until  near  the 
morning,  when  I was  awoke  by  finding  the  house  full  of 


874 


SOUTH  SEA 


people,  who  had  come  to  beg  for  my  advice,  and  the 
remedies  for  the  “ various  ills  5>  to  which  their  u flesh  is 
heir/'* 

But  on  examination  of  their  complaints,  I found  that 
many  of  them  had  arisen  from  wounds  that  had  been 
inflicted  with  musquet-balls ; and,  to  my  astonishment, 
I found  that  these  islanders,  which  I had  been  led  to 
suppose  from  accounts  both  written  and  verbal,  were  in 
a state  of  considerable  religious  civilization,  were  at  war  ! 
having  had  three  engagements  within  the  last  eighteen 
months  with  the  natives  of  an  island  called  Otaya,  one 
of  the  same  group,  and  in  sight  of  Bolabola ; in  the 
last  engagement  with  whom  the  Bolabola  men,  having 
invaded  Otaya,  were  driven  off  with  the  loss  of  between 
twenty  and  thirty  killed  and  many  wounded  ; the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  last-mentioned  island  having  been  assisted 
in  their  defence  by  the  people  of  Huahine,  and  also  by 
those  of  Ulitea.  But  this  had  not  deterred  them  from 
the  preparation  of  another  expedition  against  Otaya, 
upon  which  they  were  all  busily  employed  on  our  arrival, 
and  which  in  some  measure  accounted  for  their  disorderly 
and  wild  appearance,  and  also  for  the  king’s  anxiety  to 
retain  me  among  them,  thinking  no  doubt  that  I should 
be  very  useful,  to  dress  the  wounds  which  his  people 
were  likely  to  receive  in  battle. 

One  fine-looking  fellow  complained  of  the  effects  of  a 
musket-ball,  which  had  passed  completely  through  his 
chest ; he  had  a scar  in  front  marking  the  place  of  its 
entrance,  and  another  behind,  immediately  under  the 
lowest  angle  of  the  scapula  or  blade-bone,  where  it  had 


WHALING  VOYAGE, 


875 


made  its  exit,  both  of  which,  however,  had  entirely 
healed.  He  complained  of  difficulty  of  breathing,  and 
prostration  of  strength,  with  frequent  hermorrhage  from 
the  mouth — a proof  that  the  lungs  had  been  perforated, 
an  injury  that  he  probably  did  not  long  survive.  Others 
appeared  with  bullets  embedded  in  various  parts  of  their 
bodies,  the  external  wounds  which  had  been  made  on 
their  entrance  having  healed,  so  that  they  produced  but 
little  inconvenience  to  their  possessors.  Numbers  of 
fine-looking  men  presented  themselves  in  turn,  and  com- 
plained of  the  various  injuries  that  they  had  received 
during  the  war,  which  I should  have  thought  would 
have  cooled  down  their  ardour  a little,  and  have  caused 
them  to  be  less  eager  for  another  affray ; nevertheless 
they  appeared  full  of  animation  when  their  next  expe- 
dition was  spoken  of.  But  if  Mars  had  afflicted  them 
so  sorely,  Venus  herself  had  been  much  less  kind  than 
her  consort ; their  intercourse  with  foreigners  had  left 
them  diseases  that  were  depopulating  the  islands;-— 
men,  women,  and  even  little  children  in  arms  were  suf- 
fering from  this  worst  of  Pandora's  gifts,  for  the  cure  or 
alleviation  of  which  they  possessed  neither  knowledge 
nor  means.  Besides  these,  which  they  had  brought 
upon  themselves  from  their  own  imprudence,  nature  had 
also  afflicted  them  herself  with  various  maladies  which 
appear  among  them  spontaneously ; of  which  I noticed 
more  particularly  the  elephantiasis,  or  elephant  leg, 
which  is  an  enormously  diseased  growth  of  one  of  the 
legs,  and  wrhich  is  supposed  by  some  physiologists  to 
arise  from  a peculiar  state  of  the  absorbents  of  the 


SOUTH  SEA 


3/6 

affected  part;  they  are  also  naturally  subject  to  a kind 
of  nervous  consumption,  and  hydrocele,  the  part  affected 
in  which,  in  the  case  I saw,  was  of  an  immense  size, 
being  at  least  twenty-five  inches  in  its  circumference  ; 
they  are  also  affected  with  other  diseases  of  the  same 
organs,  which  consist  of  a stony  hardening  of  the  internal 
part,  but  which  is  attended  with  a very  slow  growth* 
I also  saw  several  persons  who  were  affected  with  pos- 
terior curvature  of  the  spine,  familiarly  known  as  hunch- 
backs. 

When  I started  from  the  king9s  house  in  the  morning, 
I was  surrounded  by  about  two  hundred  persons,  many 
of  whom  implored  me  to  visit  their  sick  relations  or 
friends  ; and  as  I had  before  done  at  Monte  Christa,  I 
did  here ; I set  about  doing  all  the  good  I could  for 
those  wretched  people,  who  were  suffering  torments  of 
various  kinds  without  a prospect  of  relief,  and  the  un- 
fortunate creatures,  writhing  from  their  pangs,  looked 
upon  me  as  an  angel  sent  from  heaven,  to  administer  to 
their  wants,  and  relieve  the  poignancy  of  their  pains. 
How  is  it  that  proper  persons  are  not  sent  out  by  the 
Missionary  Society  for  this  purpose  ? If  a small  portion 
of  the  immense  sums  that  are  annually  expended  upon 
missionaries  were  devoted  to  such  real  usefulness,  the 
poor  natives  would  indeed  feel  grateful  for  such  practical 
blessings,  and  their  minds  would  be  rendered  more  sus- 
ceptible of  being  impressed  with  a belief  in  the  Christian 
faith. 

I first  accompanied  a little  boy,  wrho  claimed  my 
attention  from  the  urgency  of  his  request  to  visit  his 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


377 


mother,  and  when  the  little  fellow  found  I had  given 
him  the  preference  over  all  the  rest,  he  bounded  before 
me  like  a deer,  shewing  me  the  ’Way  to  his  mother’s 
house.  As  we  went,  all  the  rest  of  the  people  followed 
us,  and  as  I walked  along  the  beach  against  a strong 
wind,  at  a quick  pace,  with  my  light-coloured  flowing 
clothes  flying  back,  with  my  broad-brimmed  Peruvian 
hat  bent  back  over  my  head,  leading  a crowd  of  dingy  - 
looking  natives,  the  sailors  on  board  wondered  what  T was 
about,  viewing  me  with  their  telescope  ; they  imagined 
some  disturbance  had  broken  out,  with  their  doctor  at 
its  head.  When  we  arrived  at  the  house  of  the  boy’s 
mother,  I found  the  unfortunate  woman  suffering  from 
the  effects  of  disease,  which  had  reached  a most  de- 
plorable height.  I did  all  that  was  in  my  power  to 
relieve  her  sufferings,  and  I continued  to  act  in  the 
same  manner  to  all  that  I saw  during  the  day  who 
required  my  aid,  and  they  were  not  a few.  One  young 
man  who  was  suffering  from  violent  inflammation,  I 
found  it  necessary  to  bleed,  which  excited  a good  deal  of 
curiosity  among  his  neighbours,  who  filled  the  house  on 
the  occasion,  and  who  became  quite  troublesome  with 
their  ofliciousness. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day,  1 had  the  pleasure 
of  meeting  with  Mr.  Platt,  the  English  missionary,  who 
was  residing  here,  with  Mrs.  Platt  and  his  family  of  two 
sons,  and  I have  much  pleasure  in  bearing  testimony  a 
second  time  in  this  sketch  to  the  excellent  character 
which  he  bore  among  the  people  with  whom  he  was 
sojourning.  Far  from  his  own  country  and  friends,  he 


378 


SOUTH  SEA 


was  labouring  in  these  distant  regions  to  establish  their 
belief  in  that  faith  which,  had  they  properly  accepted, 
would  have  placed  them  in  that  social  state  and  happy 
association  with  each  other,  that  would  have  made  them 
“ beings  progressive,”  and  not  (i  retrograde,5’— beings  of 
light,  of  peace,  of  happiness  ; by  which  their  brutish  idols 
would  have  been  broken,  the  horrors  of  their  sanguinary 
wars  mitigated,  and  some  limit  placed  to  their  shocking 
depravities,  many  of  which  have  greatly  increased  since 
their  first  connexion  with  Europeans.  But  to  give  them 
those  blessings,  Mr,  Platt  had  struggled  with  the  hydra 
of  the  darkest  ignorance;  not  only  had  he  inculcated 
the  precept,  but  he  had  demonstrated  the  virtue  of  his 
creed  by  the  example  of  his  own  acts,  and  yet  he  had 
only  succeeded  with  a few,  whom  he  thought  he  could 
claim  as  faithful  followers. 

This  want  of  success  cannot,  however,  be  attributed 
altogether  to  want  of  capacity  to  receive  instruction  in 
the  natives  among  whom  these  endeavours  have  been 
made.  But  the  goodly  example  and  virtuous  teaching 
of  one  man,  can  hardly  countervail  the  evil  effects  pro- 
duced in  the  minds  of  these  people  by  the  opposite 
sights  of  many  pretenders  to  the  character  of  Christian 
apostles  ; but  who  pursue  rather  the  manner  of  gain, 
and  self-indulgence,  than  the  worthier  objects  of  their 
mission.  It  is  indeed  grievous,  that  the  well-meaning 
intentions  of  charitable  and  religious  persons  in  this 
country  should  be  in  so  many  instances  frustrated  by 
the  cupidity,  and  sometimes  criminality,  of  the  agents 
they  have  employed ; and  although  I am  far,  very  far 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


879 


from  an  intention  of  casting  any  reflections  on  the 
general  character  of  perhaps  as  ardent  and  devoted  a 
body  of  Christian  missionaries  as  have  ever  assisted  in 
spreading  the  voice  of  the  gospel  in  distant  lands,  among 
dangers  and  privations  of  every  kind ; yet,  from  what 
I have  myself  witnessed  and  deplored,  I fervently  hope 
that  the  eyes  of  the  public  may  be  widely  opened  to 
the  necessity  of  some  more  strict  supervision  into  the 
character  and  conduct  of  many  of  the  missionaries,  who 
now  disgrace  their  country  and  their  creed  in  some  of 
the  islands  of  the  South  Sea,  and  thus  throw  discredit 
on  the  exertions  of  their  really  well-disposed  colabourers. 

And,  moreover,  a religious  tyranny  of  the  most  irk- 
some character  has  been  resorted  to  in  many  places, 
where  the  people,  long  before  they  have  been  sufficiently 
educated  to  perceive  the  beauties  of  the  Christian  faith, 
have  been  compelled  to  attend  churches  and  prayer- 
meetings,  two  or  three  times  a-day,  by  the  orders  of 
their  kings  or  chiefs,  whose  interest  may  have  been 
bought  by  the  missionary,  and  who  causes  the  unhappy 
people  to  be  goaded  with  the  most  obnoxious  laws,  for 
the  purpose  of  forcing  them  to  believe  in  a religion 
which  in  their  present  state  of  ignorance  they  are  totally 
unable  to  appreciate— they  therefore  naturally  feel  the 
tyranny  of  such  proceedings,  and  they  revolt  against 
that  which,  if  gentle  persuasion  had  been  used,  or  other 
means  more  fitted  and  congenial  to  their  present  state 
of  barbarism,  they  wrould  no  doubt  have  accepted  with 
willing  thankfulness. 

At  the  Sandwich  Islands  a system  of  religious  intole- 


SOUTH  SEA 


ranee  has  grown  up  among  the  traders  in  religion  there* 
that  I am  quite  sure  cannot  much  longer  be  endured. 
For  I was  informed  by  one  of  their  chiefs  who  had  been 
partly  educated  in  America,  that  the  land  of  the  Sand- 
wich Islands  had  not  been  nearly  so  well  cultivated 
since  the  arrival  of  the  missionaries  among  them — nor 
had  the  people  been  so  industrious ; and  he  explained 
the  cause  in  this  way : that  the  land  was  heavily  taxed 
by  the  chiefs,  who  were  the  proprietors.  The  common 
people,  who  cultivated  it  for  their  support,  were  obliged 
to  work  upon  it  early  and  late  to  sustain  themselves 
and  families  comfortably  out  of  the  produce,  even  before 
the  arrival  of  the  missionaries.  But  when  these  came, 
and  allied  themselves  wuth  the  chiefs  who  held  the  land, 
and  who  also  were  the  rulers  of  the  people,  their  solici- 
tations and  bribes  induced  the  chiefs  to  frame  laws  by 
which  the  common  people  are  obliged  to  attend  churches 
and  prayer-meetings  two  or  three  times  a day,  and  in 
some  places  I believe  every  two  or  three  hours,  so  that 
the  time  which  was  formerly  allotted  to  labour  in  dig- 
ging their  tarro-patches,  or  cultivating  their  tarro,  and 
other  food,  is  interfered  with  to  such  an  extent,  that 
numbers  of  them  are  unable  any  longer  to  cope  w7ith  the 
loss  which  they  thus  sustain,  and  in  the  end,  finding 
their  land  become  a burthen  to  them,  they  throw  it  off 
their  shoulders,  and  either  lead  a miserable,  outcast, 
wandering  life,  subsisting  upon  a scanty  allowance, 
where  before  they  enjoyed  an  abundance,  or  they  go 
down  to  Oahoo  as  servants  of  the  white  residents,  which 
they  are  willing  to  become  for  little  more  than  their 
food. 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


381 


But  not  only  is  this  the  case,  but  they  are  obliged 
also,  in  many  instances,  to  act  as  slaves  to  the  mis- 
sionaries. If  the  Christian  white  man  moves  from  one 
district  to  another,  he  or  his  family  and  baggage  must 
be  carried  about  in  a sort  of  44  palanquin,”  or  <£  settee,” 
of  course  greatly  to  the  delight  of  the  poor  native,  who 
frequently  gets  nothing  for  his  trouble  ; for  when  his 
shoulder  aches  from  the  weight  he  has  sustained  in  a 
hot  climate,  or  perhaps  over  uneven  or  broken  ground, 
or  through  an  entangled  forest,  he  is  repaid  with  a 
prayer  or  goodly  blessing  for  his  pains,  and  which  is 
considered  as  a full  equivalent  for  his  labour, — and  of 
this  I will  give  an  instance. 

In  1832,  after  the  missionary  of  the  district  of  Wai- 
mea,  Owhyhee,  had  returned  from  an  expedition,  he 
obtained,  although  with  some  trouble,  a few  of  the 
natives  to  carry  his  baggage  about  twelve  or  fourteen 
miles  into  the  country  to  the  place  where  he  resided, 
and  after  they  had  done  it,  they  were  handsomely  repaid 
by  their  Christian  pastor  with  a 44  p,  a, —pa,”  as  it  is 
termed,  being  the  native  alphabet;  at  a time  too  of  a 
great  scarcity  of  food.  The  natives  in  that  instance 
treated  the  affair  with  disdain,  although  it  was  termed 
by  the  holy  man,  who  presented  it  to  them  as  a pay- 
ment for  their  severe  toils,  the  44  bread  of  life.” 

I have  before  mentioned,  in  Chapter  Y.  the  puritanical 
bigotry  which  prevented  the  natives  of  Owhyhee  afford- 
ing a draught  of  water  to  our  famishing  men  who  landed 
there  after  a long  pull  in  the  boats,  exposed  to  a broiling 
sun,  because  it  was  Sunday — faugh  ! 


382 


SOUTH  SEA 


When  these  doings  of  the  missionaries  are  taken 
into  consideration — when  we  consider  the  uncultivated, 
although  cunning  mind  of  the  Polynesian  islander,— 
when  we  look  to  the  false  spirits  which  have  gone 
among  them  from  Europe  and  taught  them  hypocrisy— 
when  we  consider  the  tyranny  that  has  been  made  use 
of  to  press  a religion  into  their  minds  which  it  is  im- 
possible for  them  to  appreciate,  can  we  wonder  that 
farther  progress  has  not  been  made  among  these  people  ? 
can  we  wonder  at  one  man  failing  when  he  is  surrounded 
with  difficulties,  such  as  I have  mentioned?  can  we 
wonder  at  seeing  the  Society  Islanders  at  the  present 
time  in  a worse  state  than  they  ever  were  before  ? 
although  missionaries  and  missionary  expeditions  have 
been  sent  out  of  number,  and  to  the  Society  Islands  in 
particular  for  these  last  forty  years ! ! 

At  the  time  of  our  visit  to  these  islands,  the  mass  of 
the  people  were  in  the  utmost  state  of  demoralization, 
and  had  been  in  that  condition  for  some  time ; every 
thing  had  gone  into  disorder.  Mr.  Williams,  who  had 
resided  among  them  for  many  years,  had  left  in  disgust, 
and  had  abandoned  the  missionary  house  to  its  fate.  A 
Mr.  Smith,  a missionary,  whom  I saw  at  Riatea,  in- 
formed me  that  the  people  were  in  such  an  outrageous 
state  that  it  was  dangerous  to  live  among  them.  He 
stated  that  they  got  so  intoxicated  with  the  spirit  they 
had  learned  to  distil  from  the  “ Ti”  root,  and  became  so 
maddened  from  its  effect,  that  they  scarcely  knew  what 
they  were  doing ; drinking  it,  as  they  do,  in  enormous 
yjpfctities,  thinking  nothing,  in  one  of  their  drunken 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


383 


paroxysms,  of  swallowing  a quart  in  two  or  three 
draughts.  When  they  came  on  board  our  ship,  they 
stole  every  thing  that  they  could  lay  their  hands  on, 
and  if  it  had  not  been  for  our  vigilance  we  should 
have  been  considerable  losers  from  their  visit.  Pro- 
stitution is  also  carried  on  without  limit,  wives  and 
daughters  are  compelled  to  abandon  themselves  for 
very  trifling  considerations.  In  fact,  we  found  them 
the  very  worst  people  we  had  met  with  during  our 
travels,  although  forty  years’  expense  and  trouble  had 
been  devoted  to  them.  They  were  indeed  vastly  infe- 
rior to  the  St.  John’s  Islanders,  who  had  not  a single 
European  residing  among  them.  So  bad  indeed  had 
they  become,  that  they  had  actually  formed  the  plan  of 
seizing  our  ship,  of  which  we  were  informed  by  Mr. 
Platt  and  the  two  kings,  who  were  father  and  son,  and 
we  thus  succeeded  in  frustrating  their  designs. 

If  expeditions,  having  for  their  object  the  moral  or 
religious  education  and  improvement  of  these  islanders, 
are  still  to  be  sent  out,  at  the  expense  of  our  liberal  and 
well  - meaning  fellow  - countrymen,  is  it  not  high  time 
that  a different  system  should  be  pursued,  by  which  we 
should  have  a better  chance  of  promoting  the  extension 
of  the  above  objects,  finding  that  the  old  system,  after 
having  been  persevered  in  with  great  obstinacy  for  forty 
years,  has  entirely  failed? 

The  old  king  of  Bolabola,  who  had  formerly  been  very 
pic$us,  had,  like  the  rest  of  his  countrymen,  much  de- 
generated, and  seemed  to  possess  but  little  real  power 
among  his  people ; for  when  the  native  pilot,  who  had 


884 


SOUTH  SEA 


directed  our  ship  into  the  harbour,  had  received  his  usual 
fee  of  four  dollars  from  the  captain,  he  came  into  the 
king's  house  while  I happened  to  be  there,  to  give  his 
majesty  his  share  of  the  revenue  which  he  had  received. 
A warm  discussion,  however,  soon  arose  between  them 
about  the  division  of  the  spoil,  in  which  I could  per- 
ceive that  the  king  had  a strong  desire  to  obtain  posses- 
sion of  the  whole  four  dollars,  and  it  was  very  plainly  to 
be  seen  also,  that  the  pilot  had  no  wish  to  relinquish 
them,  for  he  seemed  remarkably  unwilling  to  give  his 
majesty  any  part  of  the  dues.  The  king,  however, 
having  asked  him,  in  a very  unaffected  manner,  to  look 
at  the  dollars  which  he  held  in  his  hand,  his  majesty 
having  watched  his  opportunity  while  he  was  allowing 
him  to  do  so,  snatched  the  whole  of  them  from  the  palm 
of  the  astonished  and  mortified  pilot,  who  now  raised  his 
voice  to  an  alarming  height  at  this  unregal  conduct,  and 
did  not  appear  to  study  in  the  least  what  sort  of  lan- 
guage he  should  make  use  of  towards  his  royal  master, 
who,  “ smoothing  his  haughty  front,  was  seen  to  grin 
a smile  of  happiness. ” But  the  pilot  was  not  to  be  sub- 
dued by  the  smiles  of  royalty,  for,  watching  his  oppor- 
tunity like  the  king,  he  pounced  with  the  velocity  of  an 
eagle  upon  the  half-open  hand  of  the  monarch  which 
contained  the  dollars,  and  in  a determined,  but  still 
somewhat  gentle  manner,  extracted  three  of  them,  which 
the  king  appeared  rather  to  suffer  than  greatly  to  resist, 
but  when  he  found  that  only  one  had  been  left  behind 
by  the  avaricious  pilot,  a divulsion  of  feeling  again 
shewed  itself,  and  which  was  not  allayed  until  the 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


885 


much- coveted  dues  were  equally  divided  by  the  reluc- 
tant navigator,  when  this  curious  exchequer  scene  ter- 
minated seemingly  to  their  mutual  satisfaction. 

When  I saw  at  this  place,  the  father  of  two  very  young, 
but  pretty  and  interesting  girls,  with  the  Bible  on  his 
knees,  apparently  devoted  to  its  truth,  lifting  his  eyes  to 
heaven  with  his  features  seemingly  filled  with  sincere 
sanctity,  I could  scarcely  doubt  the  purity  of  his  in- 
tentions ; but  when  I sawT  the  base  hypocrite  the  next 
moment,  in  the  most  cunning  manner,  offering  his  two 
little  innocent-looking  daughters  at  the  shrine  of  the 
voluptuary,  and  for  the  most  miserable  pittance,  I could 
not  help  reflecting  how  little  practical  morality  he  had 
acquired  during  the  course  of  his  religious  studies. 

The  women  of  Bolabola,  like  the  men,  are  far  from 
being  disagreeable  in  their  appearance,  many  of  them 
being  very  good  looking,  their  features  being  of  that 
form  in  most  instances,  which  coincides  with  our  own 
ideas  of  beauty.  They  are  of  a light  olive  complexion, 
but  they  disfigure  their  skin  nearly  all  over  the  body 
with  tattooing,  which  is  done  nevertheless  in  a very  in- 
genious manner,  displaying  some  degree  of  elegance  in 
the  scrolls  and  circles  that  appear  in  every  part ; then* 
hair  is  constantly  kept  cut  very  close  to  the  head,  except 
a circle  of  it  in  the  form  of  a coronet,  which  surrounds 
the  crown  of  the  head,  and  which  is  allowed  to  grow  to 
about  an  inch  and  a half  in  length.  They  are  much  less 
in  stature  than  the  men,  and  they  possess  the  proper 
slenderness  and  proportions  which  belong  to  the  true 
feminine  figure.  If  they  are  not  really  handsome,  they 

s 


888 


SOUTH  SEA 


enjoy  that  kind  of  pleasant  countenance  which  is  always 
the  companion  of  good  temper,  and  which  is  so  impor- 
tant an  auxiliary  of  female  loveliness ; they  smile  with 
such  an  innocent  sweetness  that  it  is  impossible  to  sup- 
pose for  an  instant  that  the  coarser  passions  ever  ruffle 
their  breasts,  y/hile  their  eyes  are  generally  large,  and 
very  expressive.  One  especially  I remember,  and  until 
I had  seen  hers,  I never  imagined  that  human  eyes 
could  possess  such  amazing  beauty,— they  were  large 
and  full,  yet  much  animated ; the  iris  was  of  a dark 
brown  colour,  and  the  adnata  or  white,  as  it  is  termed, 
resembled  the  bluish  whiteness  of  mother-o’-pearl ; but 
it  was  the  lustre  of  those  beautiful  orbs  which  caused 
them  to  be  so  much  noticed,— they  appeared  as  if  they 
were  large  drops  of  fluid  crystal,  held  in  form  by  some- 
thing magical,  and  when  they  moved  they  glistened  with 
a most  surpassing  effect— not  with  the  brightness  of  a 
glassy  hardness,  but  with  the  softness  of  the  reflected 
light  of  a rich  diamond ; the  eyelids  were  beautifully 
carved,  and  exquisitely  finished,  having  long  dark  lashes 
sweetly  turned  and  regularly  placed,  making  the  whole 
appear  of  such  wonderful  perfection  that  language  falls 
short  in  the  description.  When  I beheld  them  I could 
scarcely  believe  them  to  be  human,  they  were  so  much 
superior  in  their  beauty  to  all  previous  fancy  of  mine0 
The  owner  of  them,  too,  was  a very  pretty,  and  she 
appeared  an  innocent,  girl. 

In  the  dusk  of  the  evening,  previous  to  the  day  on 
which  we  took  our  departure  from  Bolabola,  I was 
standing  on  the  quarter-deck  of  our  vessel,  in  conversa- 


WHALING  VOYAGE* 


387 


tion  with  one  of  the  officers  who  was  on  watch,  when 
we  saw  all  at  once  arise  a considerable  degree  of  agita- 
tion in  a part  of  the  sea  that  was  situated  between  us 
and  the  shore,  and  examining  more  intently  we  could 
perceive  a number  of  dark-looking  objects  upon  its 
surface,  which  were  moving  about  with  great  velocity. 
We  directly  supposed  them  to  be  a “ school,”  or  drove  of 
porpoises  which  appeared  to  be  coming  towards  us.  But 
it  was  not  long  before  we  heard  human  voices,  and  dis- 
covered the  figures  to  be  human  beings  who  were  swim- 
ming towards  us,  and  as  they  came  nearer,  we  could 
perceive  that  they  were  racing  against  each  other  with 
great  animation  ; but  what  was  our  surprise  when  we 
saw  them  come  close  to  the  ship,  and  seizing  her  chains, 
leap  on  board  with  the  greatest  alacrity  and  ease,  and 
before  we  could  scarcely  find  time  to  look  around  us, 
we  found  upwards  of  thirty  women  on  board,  who  in  a 
few  minutes  were  scattered  all  over  the  ship,  bargaining 
with  the  sailors  for  the  various  things  which  they  had 
brought  on  board  with  them  for  sale. 

On  the  16th  of  October  1832,  we  bade  adieu  to  the 
Friendly  Islands,  and  soon  meeting  with  strong  north- 
east winds,  we  made  way  at  a rapid  rate  towards  our 
native  land ; the  sailors  saying,  in  consequence  of  our 
speed,  that  their  wives  and  sweethearts  had  now  got  hold 
of  the  ship,  and  were  giving  “ a long  pull,  a strong  pull, 
and  a null  altogether.” 

A CJ 

The  26th  found  us  in  the  latitude  of  41°  o'  south, 
and  in  the  longitude  of  152°  46'  west,  being  not  very  far 
from  New  Zealand,  where  we  fell  in  with  the  regular 


888 


SOUTH  SEA 


north-west  winds,  which  almost  constantly  blow  in  that 
part  of  the  world.  All  sail  was  now  crowded  upon  the 
ship,  including  studding-sails,  low  and  aloft,  and  the 
ship’s  head  was  placed  directly  towards  Cape  Horn.  As 
we  increased  our  distance  from  New  Zealand,  so  we  found 
the  regular  waves,  which  now  rolled  after  us,  increasing 
in  size,  and  by  the  time  we  had  passed  over  about  two- 
thirds  of  the  enormous  stretch  of  ocean  that  lies  between 
New  Zealand  and  Cape  Horn,  the  prodigious  seas  had 
attained  their  maximum  height,  which  was  about  thirty 
feet,  while  the  masses  of  water  which  formed  them  were 
of  vast  magnitude.  The  weather,  too,  became  exceed- 
ingly disagreeable,  from  the  coldness,  dampness,  and 
darkness  which  now  prevailed,  all  tending  to  rob  us  of 
our  natural  warmth  to  a most  inconvenient  extent ; for 
not  only  were  our  frames  most  miserably  susceptible  of 
cold,  from  our  long  sojourn  in  hot  countries,  but  what 
rendered  our  stormy  passage  still  more  distressing  to  the 
sailors  was  the  want  of  warm  clothing  which  many  of 
them  experienced,  many  of  them  having  worn  it  out 
during  the  voyage  ; while  others  had  imprudently  parted 
with  their  winter  clothing  for  the  most  trifling  consi- 
derations, at  the  various  places  we  had  touched  during 
the  voyage.  Our  bedding,  and  almost  everything  in 
the  ship,  during  our  passage  round  the  66  Horn,”  became 
saturated  with  sea- water ; for  the  ship  as  she  passed  along, 
now  on  the  top  of  a giant  wave,  and  now  appearing  like 
a mere  cock-boat  between  two  of  them,  took  in  a great 
deal  of  water,  not  only  on  account  of  the  heavy  press  of 
sail  that  was  almost  constantly  kept  upon  hen  but  also 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


389 


from  the  depth  which  she  lay  in  the  water,  owing  to  the 
weight  of  her  cargo,  which  allowed  the  spray  and  the 
tops  of  the  waves  to  wash  over  her  in  frequent  succes- 
sion. 

In  our  vast  passage  from  near  New  Zealand,  until  we 
arrived  at  Cape  Horn,  we  had  nothing  to  do  with  con- 
trary winds.  Heavy  gales  and  enormous  waves  con- 
stantly chased  us— the  blast  of  the  hail-squall  howled 
loudly  among  the  masts— the  mountainous  seas  rolling 
after  us  in  awful  grandeur:  lifting  their  swelling  bosoms 
high  above  our  decks,  they  came  careering  along  with 
furious  majesty,  until  the  ship,  floating  on  their  summits, 
allowed  the  dashing  and  hissing  sea-cap  to  pass  and 
lash  with  its  snowy  foam  her  moss-grown  and  weather- 
beaten sides,  or  wash  her  whitened  deck.  Onward  it 
flies,  until  the  sound  heard  dying  in  the  distance  ahead 
is  again  renewed  by  others,  which  are  constantly  rising 
astern. 

At  night,  in  those  boisterous  regions,  everything 
around  appears  dismal  in  the  extreme.  The  dark  ocean, 
the  murky  sky,  the  howling  wind,  the  hissing  spray,  the 
rolling  ship,  slowly  ascending  and  descending  the  enor- 
mous waves,  with  her  decks  covered  with  water,  dashing 
to  and  fro  according  to  her  motion,  all  conspire  in  this 
lonely  passage  to  “ render  night  hideous.”  Sometimes, 
amid  the  howling  blast  and  the  clattering  of  the  pitiless 
hail- storm,  the  sailor’s  voice  could  be  heard  from  aloft, 
upon  the  “ high  and  giddy  mast,”  giving  instruction  to 
those  upon  the  deck,  while  from  the  rolling  of  the  ship 
he  is  every  moment  suspended  over  the  raging  deep— at 

s 2 


890 


SOUTH  SEA 


the  same  fearful  moment  also  the  force  of  the  tempest 
strains  his  firmest  grasp,  and  threatens  to  bury  him  in 
the  dark  abyss.  When  the  ship  that  we  sailed  in  from 
England  was  engaged  on  a previous  voyage  doubling  the 
Cape,  being  outward  bound,  the  captain  ordered  three  of 
his  best  men  to  go  out  upon  the  bowsprit  and  stow  the 
jib-sail,  although  the  ship  was  every  few  minutes  plung- 
ing headforemost  into  the  enormous  waves  that  opposed 
her  progress,  and  which  sometimes  submersed  her  decks 
as  far  as  the  windlass.  The  poor  fellows  immediately 
saw  the  imminent  danger  to  which  they  were  about  to 
be  exposed,  but  a murmur  was  not  heard  to  escape  their 
lips.  Quickly  they  handed  the  wet  and  heavy  sail,  but 
while  they  were  so  doing  another  mountainous  wrave  is 
seen  approaching— the  ship  “ pitches 99  headlong  into  it— 
their  piercing  cry  of  horror  is  heard  above  the  roaring  of 
the  storm— in  a moment  they  are  engulphed,  the  relent™ 
less  wave  buries  them  deeply  within  its  cold  embrace; 
but  the  ship  again  rises,  trembling  from  the  concussion, 
the  bowsprit  is  again  seen  above  the  roaring  ocean — but 
where  are  the  poor  fellows  who  were  upon  it  but  a 
moment  before  ! A cry  of  horror  runs  through  the  ship, 
that  they  are  washed  away— but  they  are  neither  seen 
nor  heard ; their  cries  are  speedily  hushed  by  the  gurg- 
ling waters  which  roll  above  their  heads— their  out- 
stretched arms  and  grasping  hands  are  mocked  by  the 
yielding  fluid  which  they  embrace,  their  heaving  chests 
vehemently  struggle  for  their  natural  expanse —their 
thoughts  are  a whirlwind  of  frightful  despair — their 
hearts  are  choking  and  bursting  from  the  pent-up  blood 


WHALING  VOYAGE* 


which  they  contain— their  eyes  start,  their  teeth  grind, 
their  brains  are  on  fire,  the  death-pang  is  soon  upon 
them— another  dreadful  struggle  is  concluded— they 
gasp,  and  gulph  down  the  briny  fluid— they  become 
inanimate;  their  limbs  relax,  a slow  gurgling  sound 
escapes  their  collapsing  chests,  and  the  scene  is  ended ; 
the  ship  passes  over  and  away  from  them,  and  leaves 
them  the  sport  of  the  unruly  ocean,  or  a prey  to  the 
hungry  shark. 

Arriving  near  the  scene  of  this  melancholy  event,  we 
could  not  prevent  our  thoughts  from  arising  upon  other 
instances,  somewhat  of  the  same  nature,  which  have 
occurred  at  this  place  but  too  frequently.  But  even 
these  misfortunes  do  not  damp  the  ardour  of  the  true 
British  sailor,  who  scorning  the  slightest  symptom  of 
fear  dashes  the  compassionate  tear  from  his  eyelid,  and 
thinks  of  fairer  scenes.  For  although  the  winds  howl, 
they  are  propelling  him  to  the  home  of  his  beloved ; 
although  the  ocean  rages,  it  is  carrying  him  to  his 
humble  cot.  He  feels  that  the  being  whom  he  loves  is 
anxiously  waiting  his  arrival,  so  that  his  hope  becomes 
as  buoyant  as  the  moment  before  it  was  depressed,  and 
the  howling  winds  and  dashing  waves  are  thought  of  no 
more  than  as  a chorus  to  his  song. 

On  Sunday  the  18th  of  November  1832,  we  again 
came  in  sight  of  Cape  Horn,  and  we  also  passed  close  to 
the  islands  that  are  known  as  the  “ Diegos  Ramarez,’5 
which  leaving  with  a fair  wind,  we  soon  doubled  the 
Cape,  and  pursued  our  course  homewards  through  the 
South  Atlantic;  until,  on  the  19th  of  December,  we 


892 


SOUTH  SEA 


touched  at  Pernambuca  on  the  coast  of  Brazil,  where 
we  -witnessed  many  curious  scenes,  which,  from  fear  of 
being  too  tedious  I must  omit  to  describe.  Pressing 
still  homewards,  we  crossed  the  equinox  for  the  sixth 
time  on  the  26th  of  December ; and  on  the  23d  of 
January  1833,  we  passed  close  to  the  shores  of  some 
of  the  Azores,  or  Western  Islands.  When,  to  our  great 
delight,  on  the  3d  of  February  following,  we  had  the 
good  fortune  to  make  Beachy  Head,  although  it  was 
enveloped  in  a thick  fog,  having  encountered  horrible 
weather  in  the  Channel,  in  which  we  were  all  nearly  lost 
on  our  own  shores,  and  after  an  absence  of  the  “ Sarah 
and  Elizabeth  of  thirty-two  months,  and  of  my  own 
of  two  years  and  four  months ; during  which  time  I had 
passed  over  the  surface  of  the  ocean  to  the  extent  of 
fifty  thousand  miles  ! 

But,  when  we  had  escaped  all  our  marine  dangers, 
and  began  to  feast  our  eyes  upon  our  own  native  land, 
a thousand  distressing  ideas  started  from  their  hidden 
recesses  in  our  minds,  that  had  only  been  obscured 
by  the  passing  events  with  which  we  had  been  sur- 
rounded. Stern  disease  had  been  raging  during  our 
absence,  thousands  had  been  swept  off  in  its  uncommon 
and  devastating  course.  Traversing  the  ocean,  we  knew 
little  of  the  affairs  that  were  progressing  in  our  own 
homes,  and  among  our  dearest  friends.  We  therefore, 
as  we  drew  near  our  kindred  hearths,  felt  doubts  spring 
up  in  our  minds  of  a most  painful  nature.  What  was 
the  land  to  us,  which  we  now  so  ardently  gazed  upon, 
if  it  had  swallowed  up  during  our  absence  those  whom 


WHALING  VOYAGE. 


893 


we  most  loved  ? We  therefore  passed  homeward  with 
faltering  steps,  uncertain  as  to  what  fate  had  befallen 
those  we  thought  most  of,  feeling  with  the  poet  that— 

sTis  sweet  to  hear  the  honest  watch-dog’s  bark 
Bay  deep-mouth’d  welcome  as  you  draw  near  home  ; 

’Tis  sweet  to  know  there  is  an  eye  will  mark 
Your  coming,  and  shine  brighter  when  you  come. 

And  we  could  scarcely  sustain  ourselves  when  we 
thought  of  returning  to  a desolate  home.  When  I 
approached  the  old  house  which  I had  left,  and  saw  it 
possessing  the  same  precise  appearance  as  it  had  done 
on  my  departure,  I felt  my  nerves  strengthened— I 
approached  the  door,  but  not  without  misgivings— I 
knocked,  it  was  immediately  opened,— the  smiling  face 
and  beaming  eye,  which  I had  often  seen  in  my  dreams, 
stood  in  firm  health  before  me— I embraced,  I quickly 
inquired  if  all  was  well.  With  the  affirmative,  I sunk 
on  the  old  sofa,  and  with  heartfelt  gratitude  humbly 
thanked  Him  who  had  preserved  me  through  the  various 
strange  vicissitudes  of  a South- Sea  Voyage. 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  BY  MANNING  AND  MASON, 
IVY-LANE,  PATERNOSTER-ROW. 


SONIAN  INSTITUTION  NOIJLfllllSNl  NVINOSHifWS  S3  I U V'd  l 


SONIAN  INSTITUTION  NOIlflillSNi  NVINQSHIIWS  S3  1HVH: 


2: 


•shims  S3ruvuan 

2: 


* 1j 

SMITHSONIAN  INSTITUl 


r 


oo 


ISONIAN  INSTITUTION  NOUfUllSNI 


NVIN0SH1UMS  S3  I HVH ! 


> 2 ' > ■ 2 
3iinmsNi_  nvinoshiiws^sb  i y vy  a n2n  b rar  i es^smith: 


z 

</> 


H 

C 

— 1 


o 

z 


IBRARIES  SMITHSONIAN  INSTITUTION  NOlifUllSNI  NVINO 


ouniusNi  nvinoshiiws  saiyvyan  LIBRARIES  smith 


IBRARIES  SMITHSONIAN  INSTITUTION  NOlifUllSNI  NVINO 


ouniusNi  nvinoshiiws  S3iyvyan  libraries  smith 


BRARIES  SMITHSONIAN  INSTITUTION  NOlinillSNI  NVINO 


3tiniusNi_ nvinoshiiws  ssiyvyaii  libraries  smith: 


2: 

CO 
— i 


—i 

C 


O 

z 


